Adverse Reactions Policy

1. Statement
We’ll first look at products that have caused an adverse reaction. This is where a customer has purchased a product from us, and its use has caused an Adverse Reaction. Getting this process right is incredibly important as customers could have had a severe reaction to a product that we’ve sold them.
2. What is an Adverse Reaction?
2.1	An adverse reaction is an unintended harmful effect that occurs following the correct use or 	consumption of a product. This includes products which are taken orally or those that are applied to the 	skin.
2.2	Adverse Reaction examples include; rashes, redness of skin, burning, digestive upsets, headaches, 	nausea, medical attention required, persistent side effects, life threatening side effect (seizure, 	anaphylactic shock). This list is not exhaustive.
2.3	Some reactions contain technical terms, and we don’t expect you to know all of them. We do ask that 	you enter anything the customer says in relation to an adverse reaction onto the till system and our 	Regulatory team will do the rest. In these situations, it is vital that you record the BBE and batch 	number. This helps technical services and regulatory services to log complaints correctly and enables the 	supplier to carry out a thorough investigation. 
3. Returning products due to an Adverse Reaction
3.1 	All returns from customers reporting an adverse reaction or a product fault should be dealt with 	sensitively. 
3.2	If a customer returns a product that is faulty or has caused an adverse reaction they are entitled to a 	refund, exchange or credit note within a longer timeframe following the initial purchase. 
3.3	Proof of purchase must be provided, and the item being returned must be within its expiry date, Best 	Before/Best Before End (BBE) date or period after opening (PAO) timescale. 
3.4	The customer must also return the product to store to be eligible for a return. 
3.5	If the product is not one which has an expiry date, BBE date, or a PAO timescale, then a 	refund/exchange should be given within 6 months of the date of purchase.
3.6	For further information on returns and refunds please see H&Bs Refunds and Returns Policy. 

Age Verification Policy

1. Statement
Holland & Barrett is committed to responsibly selling products that require customers to be of a certain age, such as those over the age of 16 or 18, in compliance with UK laws and regulations. To ensure that we uphold these legal obligations and prioritise the safety and well-being of our customers, we have established this Age Verification Policy.
2. Scope
This policy applies to all employees and authorised representatives of Holland & Barrett involved in the sale of products that require age restrictions within the United Kingdom.
3. Identification Requirement
3.1	For any product or service that requires a customer to be over the age of 16 or 18, Holland & Barrett 	will require a valid form of identification from the customer before completing the transaction.
3.2	Acceptable forms of identification include government-issued photo identification cards, such as a 	UK driver's license, UK passport, or UK identity card.
3.3	Customers who are unable to provide valid identification proving they meet the age requirement 	will not be permitted to purchase the restricted product or service.
4. Training and Awareness
4.1	Holland & Barrett will provide training to all employees and authorised representatives involved in 	age-restricted sales to ensure they are aware of this policy and understand their responsibilities.
4.2	Employees will be educated on the importance of age verification, the legal consequences of non-	compliance with UK law, and the potential risks associated with underage sales.
5. Refusal of Sale
5.1	If a customer looks to be underage you must always follow guidance on the Challenge 25 Policy. If 	a customer fails to provide valid identification or is found to be underage, Holland & Barrett 	employees will politely refuse the sale of the restricted product or service. 
5.2	In cases where there is any doubt about the customer's age, employees should refuse the sale.
6. Record Keeping
6.1 	Holland & Barrett will maintain records of all age-restricted sales within the UK, including the date, 	time, location, and type of identification presented. (This is not for the store colleagues to action).
6.2 	These records will be securely stored in accordance with applicable data protection laws and will 	be  made available for inspection by relevant UK authorities, if necessary.
7. Continuous Compliance Monitoring
7.1. 	Holland & Barrett will periodically review and assess the effectiveness of this Age Verification 	Policy to ensure ongoing compliance with UK laws and regulations.
8. Consequences of Non-Compliance
8.1 	Failure to adhere to this Age Verification Policy in accordance with UK law may result in disciplinary 	action, up to and including termination of employment or contract, as well as potential legal 	consequences in accordance with UK laws.
9. Review and Approval
9.1	This Age Verification Policy has been reviewed and approved by Holland & Barrett's management in 	consideration of UK legal requirements.
10. Questions and Reporting
10.1	If you have any questions or concerns related to this policy or suspect any violations, please 	contact H&B Help.
10.2	Holland & Barrett is committed to maintaining a safe and responsible retail environment in 	compliance with UK law and appreciates your cooperation in upholding this Age Verification Policy.

Cash & Banking Policy
1. Statement
At Holland & Barrett cash & banking is an important part of our everyday. It refers to the processes surrounding cash deposits to your safe, and then cash collections from your safe, by our service providers.
It is crucial that the policy is followed correctly to ensure store safety and security, minimise losses and compliance is adhered to.
2. Till floats & Cash Holding
2.1	Each store has an assigned float amount, and it is the store Management and level 1 and 2 	Operationally trained 	colleagues' responsibility to ensure this is monitored and accounted for each 	day.
2.2	Till floats MUST be counted twice per day with no exception. The first count should be done prior to 	the store opening and the second count should be done at the end of the day. 
2.3	The store safe MUST be counted once per day with no exception. The safe count can be done at 	any point during the day.
2.4	It is your responsibility to ensure the change ordering process has been followed and sufficient 	change is ordered for our customers. 
2.5	While we take every step to minimise the risk of theft in the event of a robbery you should hand over 	money and NOT make any attempt to defend the company money.
3. Cash Handling
3.1	You should only ever open your cash drawer manually if you are adding change or if an error has 	been made in given the customer to correct change.
3.2	Please note that we DO NOT give out change to customers. If a customer asks you to change a 	note you should politely decline.
4. Reconciling your tills
4.1	Where possible all tills should be counted in a locked office for colleague safety. 
4.2	Where this is NOT possible tills MUST be counted after you have closed the store.
5. Preparing your banking 
5.1	Your banking MUST be prepared in the evening after all tills have been cashed up. This increases 	security and reduces mistakes made with the banking bags. 
5.2	No more that £/$4.99 in coins can be included in an individual daily banking bag.
5.3	When paying back a change order the order must be paid back with notes only.
5.4	Each individual bag MUST be sealed and signed by the person sealing the bag. These then MUST 	be kept in the safe inside an open outer bag ready for your cash collection.
5.5	For traceability you MUST record the inner bag number on the duplicate bank deposit. 
5.4	The duplicate slips MUST remain in the banking book and be kept for 3 months. Retain used banking 	books in your safe. After 3 months please shred any duplicate slips.
6. Safe Management
6.1	It is the store management responsibility to ensure accurate safe management at all times. We 	have put measures in place to aid this process which include safe checks, change ordering and 	change repayment.
6.2	You MUST complete your safe check every day and the person who has counted it MUST be the 	person that signs into the ‘Safe Bags’ page on Bumblebee Reporting to verify this as they will be 	held accountable for any losses on that count.
6.3	You must order change through Loomis on your nominated order day, or you risk not having 	adequate change floats to serve your customer needs. If you miss the deadline for ordering change, 	you must wait until the following week. You must NOT go to the bank to get change.
6.4	Your change order must always be paid back in arrears. On your cash collection day, you will be 	expected to repay the FULL change order amount which was delivered on the previous cash 	collection.
7. Cash Collection Guards
7.1	We work with Loomis for the UK, PIVOTAL in NI & ROI and G4S for Jersey and Guernsey. You should 	NOT hand over any cash to any person who is NOT a collection guard for these companies.
7.2	To ensure safety measures are always adhered to you must ask the guard for ID on arrival, even if 	you recognise them, and if they cannot provide this then DO NOT hand over any monies.
7. Cash Collection Guards (Cont.)
7.3	If a guard cannot provide ID please inform:
	salesandbanking@hollandandbarrett.com
8. Reporting
8.1	In store reporting is digital but occasionally you will have some paper reporting which needs to be 	forwarded for storage at our office, such as signed credit card slips. 
8.2	For petty cash till pay outs scan your receipts to tillpayouts@hollandandbarrett.com. 
8.3	For signed credit card slips scan these to creditcardslips@hollandandbarrett.com. 
8.4	Petty cash paid out slips and signed credit card slips should be scanned to the relevant email on the 	same day as received. Once you have scanned these over you can shred the physical copies.

CCTV Policy
1. Statement
We believe that CCTV and other surveillance systems have a legitimate role to play in helping to maintain a safe and secure environment for all our staff and visitors. However, we recognise that this may raise concerns about the effect on individuals and their privacy. This policy is intended to address such concerns. Images recorded by surveillance systems are personal information which must be processed in accordance with data protection laws. We are committed to complying with our legal obligations and ensuring that the legal rights of staff and customers, relating to their personal information, are recognised and respected. 
This policy is intended to assist staff in complying with their own legal obligations when working with personal information. In certain circumstances, misuse of information generated by CCTV or other surveillance systems could constitute a criminal offence.
2. Definitions
For the purposes of this policy, the following terms have the following meanings: 
2.1	CCTV: means fixed and domed cameras designed to capture and record images of individuals and 	property. 
2.2	Individuals: means all living individuals about whom we hold personal information as a 	result of 	the operation of our CCTV (or other surveillance systems). 
2.3	Personal information: means information which is stored electronically, or in certain paper-based 	filing systems relating to a living individual who can be identified from that information (or other 	information in our possession). In respect of CCTV, this generally means video images. It may also 	include static pictures such as printed screen shots. This will include video images of identifiable 	individuals. 
2.4	Data controllers: are the people who, or organisations which, determine the manner in which any 	personal information is processed. They are responsible for establishing practices and policies to 	ensure compliance with the law. We are the data controller of all personal information used in our 	business for our own commercial purposes. 
2.5	Information users: are those of our employees whose work involves processing personal 	information. This will include those whose duties are to operate CCTV cameras and other 	surveillance systems to record, monitor, store, retrieve and delete images. Information users 	must protect the information they handle in accordance with this policy and our data protection 	policy] 
2.6	Data processors: are any person or organisation that is not an Information User (or other employee 	of Holland and Barrett) that processes information on our behalf and in accordance with our 	instructions (for example, a supplier which handles information on our behalf). 
2. Definitions (Cont)
2.7	Processing: is any activity which involves the use of information. It includes obtaining, recording 	or holding information, or carrying out any operation on the information including organising, 	amending, retrieving, using, disclosing or destroying it. Processing also includes transferring 	personal information to third parties. 
2.8	Surveillance systems: means any devices or systems designed to monitor or record images of 	individuals or information relating to individuals. The term includes CCTV systems as well as any 	technology that may be introduced in the future such as automatic number plate recognition 	(ANPR), body worn cameras, unmanned aerial systems and any other systems that capture 	information of identifiable individuals or information relating to identifiable individuals.
3. ABOUT THIS POLICY
3.1	We currently use CCTV cameras to view and record individuals on and around our premises. This 	policy outlines why we use CCTV, how we will use CCTV and how we will process information 	recorded by CCTV cameras to ensure we are compliant with data protection law and best practice. 	This policy also explains how to make a subject access request in respect of personal information 	created by CCTV.
3.2	We recognise that information that we hold about individuals is subject to the EU General Data 	Protection Regulation (GDPR). We are committed to complying with all our legal obligations under 	the GDPR. The images of individuals recorded by CCTV cameras in the workplace are personal 	information and therefore subject to the GDPR. We are a data controller in relation to the CCTV we 	use in our operations, and we seek to comply with best practice suggestions from the Information 	Commissioner’s Office (ICO).
3.3	This policy covers all employees' directors, officers, consultants, contractors, freelancers, 	volunteers, interns, casual workers, and agency workers and may also be relevant to visiting 	members of the public. 
3.4	This policy is non-contractual and does not form part of the terms and conditions of any 	employment or other contract. We may amend this policy at any time without consultation. The 	policy will be regularly reviewed to ensure that it meets legal requirements, relevant guidance 	published by the ICO and industry standards.
3.5	Failing to observe the requirements of this policy may amount to a disciplinary offence, which will 	be dealt with under Holland & Barrett's disciplinary procedure. Significant or deliberate breaches of 	this policy, such as accessing or disclosing CCTV information without authorisation or a legitimate 	reason to do so, may constitute gross misconduct and could lead to dismissal without notice.
4. PERSONNEL RESPONSIBLE
4.1	The board of directors has overall responsibility for ensuring compliance with relevant legislation 	and the effective operation of this policy. Day-to-day management responsibility for deciding what 	information is recorded, how it will be used and to whom it may be disclosed has been delegated to 	Matthew Smith (General Counsel). Day-to-day operational responsibility for CCTV cameras and the 	storage of information recorded is the responsibility of Mark Williams (Loss Prevention). 
4.2	Responsibility for keeping this policy up to date has been delegated to Mark Williams (Loss 	Prevention). 
5. REASONS FOR THE USE OF CCTV
5.1	We currently use CCTV around our sites as outlined below. We believe that such use is necessary 	for legitimate business purposes, including: 
(a) To prevent crime and protect buildings and assets from damage, disruption, vandalism and other crime.
(b) For the personal safety of staff, visitors, customers and other members of the public and to act   as a deterrent against crime.
(c) To support law enforcement bodies in the prevention, detection and prosecution of crime.
(d) To assist in day-to-day management, including ensuring the health and safety of staff, customers and others.
(e) To assist in the effective resolution of disputes which arise in the course of disciplinary or grievance proceedings.
(f) To assist in the defense of any civil litigation, including employment tribunal proceedings or other third-party disputes with, or claims against, the company or. 
This list is not exhaustive and other purposes may be or become relevant. 
6. Monitoring
6.1	CCTV monitors the exterior of the building and both the main entrance and secondary exits. 	Cameras are in use as situated on the Master Impact Assessment Schedule 24 hours a day and this 	information is continuously recorded.
6.2	Camera locations are chosen to minimise viewing of spaces not relevant to the legitimate purpose 	of the monitoring. As far as practically possible, CCTV cameras will not focus on private homes, 	gardens or other areas of private property. 
6.3	Surveillance systems will not be used to record sound. 
6. Monitoring (Cont)
6.4	Images are monitored by authorised personnel 24 hours a day every day of the year. 
6.5	Staff using surveillance systems will be given appropriate training to ensure they understand and 	observe the legal requirements related to the processing of relevant information. 
7. HOW WE WILL OPERATE ANY CCTV
7.1	Where CCTV cameras are placed in the workplace, we will ensure that signs are displayed at the 	entrance of the surveillance zone to alert individuals that their image may be recorded. Such signs 	will contain details of the organisation operating the system, the purpose for using the surveillance 	system and who to contact for further information, where these things are not obvious to those 	being monitored.
7.2	Live feeds from CCTV cameras will only be monitored where this is reasonably necessary, for 	example to protect health and safety. 
7.3	We will ensure that live feeds from cameras and recorded images are only viewed by approved 	members of staff whose role requires them to have access to such information. This may include 	HR staff involved with disciplinary or grievance matters. Recorded images will only be viewed in 	designated, secure offices. 
8. USE OF INFORMATION GATHERED BY CCTV
8.1	In order to ensure that the rights of individuals recorded by the CCTV system are protected, we will 	ensure that information gathered from CCTV cameras is stored in a way that maintains its integrity 	and security. This may include encrypting the information, where it is possible to do so. 
8.2	Given the large amount of information generated by surveillance systems, we may store video 	footage using a cloud computing system. We will take all reasonable steps to ensure that any cloud 	service provider maintains the security of our information, in accordance with industry standards. 
8.3	We may engage data processors to process information on our behalf. We will ensure reasonable 	contractual safeguards are in place to protect the security and integrity of the information. 
9. 	RETENTION AND ERASURE OF INFORMATION 	GATHERED BY CCTV
9.1	Information recorded by the CCTV system will be stored digitally using a cloud computing system. 	Information from CCTV cameras will not be retained indefinitely but will be permanently deleted 	once there is no reason to retain the recorded information. Exactly how long images will be retained 	for will vary according to the purpose for which they are being recorded. For example, where images 	are being recorded for a particular purpose, information will be kept long enough only not only for 	incidents to come to light, but also extracts may be retained for use in evidence. In all other cases, 	recorded images will be kept for no longer than 90 days. We will maintain a comprehensive log of 	when information is deleted.
9.2	At the end of their useful life, all images stored in whatever format will be erased permanently and 	securely. Any physical matter such as tapes or discs will be disposed of as confidential waste. Any 	still photographs and hard copy prints will be disposed of as confidential waste. 
10. USE OF ADDITIONAL SURVEILLANCE SYSTEMS
10.1	Prior to introducing any new surveillance system, including placing a new CCTV camera in any 	workplace location, we will carefully consider if they are appropriate by carrying out a privacy 	impact assessment (PIA).
10.2	A PIA is intended to assist us in deciding whether new surveillance cameras are necessary and 	proportionate in the circumstances and whether they should be used at all or whether any 	limitations should be placed on their use. 
10.3	Any PIA will consider the nature of the problem that we are seeking to address at that time and 	whether the surveillance camera is likely to be an effective solution, or whether a better solution 	exists. In particular, we will consider the effect a surveillance camera will have on individuals and 	therefore whether its use is a proportionate response to the problem identified. 
11. COVERT MONITORING
11.1	We will never engage in covert monitoring or surveillance (that is, where individuals are unaware 	that the monitoring or surveillance is taking place) unless, in highly exceptional circumstances, there 	are reasonable grounds to suspect that criminal activity or extremely serious malpractice is taking 	place and, after suitable consideration, we reasonably believe there is no less intrusive way to 	tackle the issue.
11.2	In the unlikely event that covert monitoring is considered to be justified, it will only be carried out 	with the express authorisation of the Head of Loss Prevention. The decision to carry out covert 	monitoring will be fully documented and will set out how the decision to use covert means was 	reached and by whom. The risk of intrusion on innocent workers will always be a primary 	consideration in reaching any such decision. 
11.3	Only limited numbers of people will be involved in any covert monitoring. 
11. COVERT MONITORING (Cont)
11.4	Covert monitoring will only be carried out for a limited and reasonable period of time consistent 	with the objectives of making the recording and will only relate to the specific suspected 	illegal or unauthorised activity. 
12. ONGOING REVIEW OF CCTV USE
12.1	We will ensure that the ongoing use of existing CCTV cameras in the workplace is reviewed 	periodically to ensure that their use remains necessary and appropriate, and that any surveillance 	system is continuing to address the needs that justified its introduction.
13. REQUESTS FOR DISCLOSURE
13.1	No images from our CCTV cameras will be disclosed to any third party, without express permission 	being given by Head of Loss Prevention. Information will not normally be released unless 	satisfactory evidence that it is required for legal proceedings or under a court order has been 	produced.
13.2	In other appropriate circumstances, we may allow law enforcement agencies to view or remove 	CCTV footage where this is required in the detection or prosecution of crime. 
13.3	We will maintain a record of all disclosures of CCTV footage. 
13.4	No images from CCTV will ever be posted online or disclosed to the media. 
14. SUBJECT ACCESS REQUESTS
14.1	Individuals may make a request for disclosure of their personal information, and this may include 	CCTV images 	(data subject access request). A data subject access request is subject to the 	statutory conditions from time to time in place and should be made in writing, in accordance with 	our data protection policy which can be requested from 	officeofdataprotection@hollandandbarrett.com.
14.2	In order for us to locate relevant footage, any requests for copies of recorded CCTV images must 	include the date and time of the recording, the location where the footage was captured and, if 	necessary, information identifying the individual. 
14.3	We reserve the right to obscure images of third parties when disclosing CCTV information as part of 	a subject access request, where we consider it necessary to do so. 
15. COMPLAINTS
15.1	If any member of staff has questions about this policy or any concerns about our use of CCTV, then 	they should speak to their manager or the HR director in the first instance.
15.2	Where this is not appropriate or matters cannot be resolved informally, employees should use our 	formal 	grievance procedure. 
16. REQUESTS TO PREVENT PROCESSING
16.1	We recognise that, in rare circumstances, individuals may have a legal right to prevent processing 	likely to cause substantial and unwarranted damage, or to prevent automated decision making. For 	further 	information regarding this, please contact officeofdataprotection@hollandandbarrett.com
Charity Fundraising
1. Statement
Charitable donations, whether in the form of money or donations in-kind (such as time, products or services), are an important part of activating our social purpose – to add quality years of life. Through supporting the work of charities, we can work together to have even more impact and reach in supporting the nation’s wellness. 
Our Charity Fundraising and Donations Policy sets out rules to make sure that we are supporting reputable charities and organisations and conducting fundraising with our colleagues and customers in the right way. 
2. Principles
2.1 	Internal Fundraising activities: Fundraising during working hours is only allowed for the support of 	Holland & Barrett’s official charity partner(s). 
2.2	Colleagues involved in fundraising activities should make sure that their primary job responsibilities 	and customer care are not compromised. 
2.3	Colleague fundraising for charities that are not formally supported by Holland & Barrett falls 	outside the scope of this policy. However, where Holland & Barrett “tops up” the amount raised by 	colleagues, then policy must be followed, and relevant authority obtained. 
2.4	In addition to respecting local laws, and Holland & Barrett’s other policies, the following rules apply 	in relation to fundraising and charitable donations: 
3. Scope
3.1	Fundraising for charities or organisation that are formally supported by Holland and Barrett. 
3.2	All Business Units and Divisions that are operated by Holland & Barrett or are majority owned by 	Holland & Barrett.
3.3	Third parties, including contracts and suppliers who make charitable donations on behalf of Holland 	& Barrett.
3.4	Franchise and owned joint ventures (for International) are expected to put in place polices 	consistent with the policy. 
	
4. Activities
4.1	All fundraising initiatives taking place during work hours should be agreed in writing by your line 	manager ahead of time and must consider health and safety aspects as well as ensuring no 	offence can be caused by the activity.
4.2	Allowed activities include but are not limited to the below.
> Colleague donation drives.
> Internal events such as charity auctions, casual/fancy dress days, sponsored activities.
> External, organised 3rd party events such as a fun run, sponsored walk, sky dive etc where monies raised can be for your chosen charity.
> Charitable social events organised by Holland & Barrett: Our Gift & Entertainment policy provides guidance for colleagues who are organising charitable events. In particular, it is important to ensure that suppliers or other stakeholders are not pressured into purchasing tickets for a charity event. 
4.3	If  colleagues are considering organising charity fundraising events, such as sporting events or 	charity dinners, they should contact retailcommunications@hollandandbarrett.com or H&B Help for 	more information on funding prior to organising. 
5. Supplier 
5.1	Where suppliers co-sponsor a charitable initiative, their role as sponsor must be clearly and 	appropriately 	acknowledged by Holland & Barrett.
5.2	Where suppliers are invited to buy tickets for Holland & Barrett fundraising events, the price of such 	tickets must not be used to subsidise the cost of running the event, including the cost for H&B 	colleagues to attend.
5.3	Where Holland & Barrett is donating to charity, colleagues may not take credit for contributions 	made by suppliers or other parties.
5.4	When asking suppliers for a donation as part of a fund-raising activity, the donation must be in a 	non-cash form e.g. a product for a raffle. 
5.5	When asking for suppliers to sponsor personal colleague fundraising activity, any donation above 	£50/€50 should be logged on the gift & hospitality register as per the gift & entertainment policy. 
6. Monetary Collections & Donations
6.1	Colleague fundraising collections: Colleagues can set up a “Just Giving page” linked to the main 	Holland & Barrett just giving page for online donations and sponsorship for activities. This allows all 	fundraising to be tracked centrally. Just giving pages should not be accessed on any company 	devices.
6.2	Donation Collection: Employees should not pressure or coerce colleagues, customers or suppliers 	into making donations. Donations should be voluntary, and the amount individually contributed 	should have the option to be kept confidential. 
6.3	No use of expenses to process charitable donations: Cash donations to charity may not be made by 	a colleague on behalf of Holland & Barrett and reclaimed as personal expenses.
6.4	All donations must be made in line with Holland & Barrett’s Bribery & Corruption Policy. 

6.5	Corporate Donations can only be made to charities registered with the relevant charity commission 	in each location, as approved by the Charity Partnerships Team. 
6.6	Donations made to charities from the sale of specific products: (cause-related marketing) must 	always have a written contract in place: A promotional statement, which states who the donation is 	from, must also be used on all marketing materials including posters, leaflets and labels. 
7. Reporting and Monitoring
7.1	The Finance Department will monitor the progress and success of fundraising activities. A summary 	report, including funds raised and the impact on the designated cause, will be published annually in 	line with the ESG policy.
7.2	ESG team / Communities Team to maintain a log of charitable donations. 
7.3	The Risk & Compliance Committee reviews the log of charitable twice each year. 
8. Adherence
8.1	Failure to adhere to this policy may result in disciplinary action. 
8.2	Colleagues have a duty to speak up if they believe the policy has been breached. Our Code of 	Business Conduct provides guidance on who colleagues can speak to, including details of our 	whistleblower policy, a confidential helpline. 
9. Non-Permitted Actions 
9.1	We don’t want to spoil anyone’s fun this Red Nose Day but for health and safety reasons there are 	some things we are unable to do while fundraising. It is the responsibility of all colleagues to ensure 	health and safety guidance is always adhered to.
9.2	Fancy dress should be politically appropriate and non-offensive. Any clothing worn should not in 	any way impede your normal working activity, and not put the health and safety of you, your 	colleagues or 	customers at risk. 
9.3	You must still wear appropriate, non-slip footwear to avoid slips, trips and falls. Any loose items 	that can catch on things when working rollers etc (dangling clothing, dangling jewellery) should not 	be worn. The outfit should be clean and cleanable, and not be made of a material that sheds 	foreign objects into the store. Your fancy dress must also be approved by your line manager. 
9.4	We cannot bring food into work to sell to customers or staff.
9.5	We must adhere to food hygiene guidance at all times in our stores and unfortunately this doesn’t 	not allow for us to sell any food or drink items which have been prepared elsewhere, and may 	contain allergens or foreign objects, so please avoid this.
9.6 	We must not bring in any electrical equipment as it has not been tested by us and may cause fire 	risk.
9.7	We must not bring in or move any equipment to a position that may cause obstruction or trip 	hazards. 
9.8	We must always follow the general Health & Safety guidelines in the Health & Safety Manual found 	here & Store  Generic Risk Assessments here. 
9.9	For events involving latex balloons, all colleagues should be aware that these balloons may cause 	an allergic reaction without the sufferer necessarily making direct contact. Stores should therefore 	be aware of such latex allergy sufferers when promoting products and events that involve latex 	balloons.
10. Fundraising Outside Work
10. 1	Although Holland and Barrett does not control what you do outside of work, we ask that you do not 	conduct fundraising in such a way that will pose risk to your health and safety or that of others. You 	must at all times keep health and safety and food hygiene in mind.
10.2	Other things to consider:
> Data Protection – you must always comply with GDPR during the fundraising process and ensure all personal data is protected and not shared. Refer to the policy [here]
> When fundraising for a company supported charity, please remember you are a representative of the company and should act accordingly.
10.3	Consequences of Non-Compliance: Failure to adhere to this policy may result in disciplinary action. 
11. Health & Safety
The following minimum standards must be adopted by all involved in store events:
11.1	An event risk assessment must be completed by the store prior to any event. Risk assessment 	templates are available here. 
11.2	The risk assessment and controls must be used to brief the team conducting the event.
11.3      The risk assessment should record the controls that must be in place to ensure the safety of the 	event. 	You should store this in the EHS folder.
11.4	This event risk assessment must cover any additional risks the fundraising activity creates, that’s are 	not already covered in your store generic risk assessments found here or Health and Safety manual 	found here. 
??11.5	All events must be actively managed by the store to ensure there is no negative experience to our 	colleagues or customers, this includes supervision and monitoring to ensure safe controls are in 	place.
??11.6	It is the store manager's responsibility to ensure that the people involved in the event are briefed in 	the controls that must be taken, and that this is recorded on the risk assessment.
11.7	Consideration must be given to the location within which any event Shopfitting display aid will be 	located so it does not prevent an obstruction to disabled customers, a fire evacuation or visually 	obstruct a fire escape or other safety signage.
??11.8	Events should not be held near to access or egress point from escalators, lifts or stairways, so as 	not to obstruct safe customer flow through the store.
??11.9	All electrical equipment must have been PAT tested, and be checked for damage prior to use.
??11.10	The use of extension cables must be kept to a minimum, and any training cables kept out of 	walkways or covered by an appropriate cable cover.
??11.11	The use of any open product or water must be kept to a minimum to prevent any slip risks. The 	product should be assessed to see if its use would present an unacceptable slip risk, the risk is 	increased significantly if the product is used in a spray or mist form or contains oils.
11.12	If you need advice on managing events in your stores, please speak to EHS or H&B Help.
11.13	Please also follow the advice given in the Health & Safety Manual found here at all times.
	
COSHH Policy
Contents
1.  Introduction 
2. Scope 
3. Definitions 
4. Responsibilities 
5. Procedures 
6. General 
7. Training 
8. Health Surveillance 
9. Planning for Accidents, Incident and Emergencies 
10. Audits 
11. Monitoring & Review 
12. Further information and advice 
13. Appendix
1. Introduction
This policy sets out the commitment of Holland and Barrett Ltd to provide safe and secure environment for our colleagues, visitors, and contractors. The policy arrangements are based on the requirements of the Control of Substances Hazardous to Health Regulations 2002 (as amended, hereafter referred to as the ‘COSHH Regulations’) and accompanying Approved Code of Practice and guidance, together with other legislative and best practice performance standards. It identifies how the Holland & Barrett will identify and manage the risks arising from hazardous substances used in or created by workplace activities. In recognition of these legal obligations and the potential adverse health effects to staff and others from exposure, Holland & Barrett will implement appropriate arrangements to ensure that no work activities are carried out without first considering the risks and necessary precautions, and any other action necessary to comply with the Regulations. This will be achieved by carrying out an assessment of the risks to health and implementing appropriate control measures to either prevent exposure, or where this is not reasonably practicable, adequately control. The COSHH Regulations only apply to substances which are hazardous to health. COSHH does not cover Lead, Asbestos, or radioactive substances.
2. Scope
2.1   	This document provides the core standards that must be achieved by Holland and Barrett Ltd 	to  ensure compliance with The Control of Substances Hazardous to Health (COSHH). 
2.2  	 It is intended to provide relevant information to managers and all other employees to enable 	everyone  to conduct themselves in a safe manner.
3. Definitions
3.1   	Hazardous substance is a substance with the potential to cause harm if inhaled, ingested, injected, 	or  absorbed through the skin or released into the environment. Common substances such as 	cleaning materials, herbicides and pesticides can be hazardous and/or harmful to the environment.
3.2	Hazardous substances occur in the following forms from a packaged item, work process or waste:
3.3	Substances or a mixture of substances classified as dangerous which carry warnings such as
	Toxic, Very Toxic, Harmful, Corrosive, Irritant, Sensitising or Carcinogenic.
• Substances with Workplace Exposure Limits (WEL).
• Biological agents (bacteria, viruses, and other micro-organisms).
• Any kind of dust in a specific concentration.
• Any other substances which may potentially create a risk to health, e.g., dusts, liquids, vapours, gases, mist, fibres, solids, or smoke.
3.4 	REACH is a European Union regulation concerning the Registration, Evaluation, Authorisation,
	and restriction of Chemicals. It came into force on 1 June 2007 and replaces several European
	Directives and Regulations with a single system. REACH will operate alongside COSHH and is 	designed
	so that better information on the hazards of chemicals and how to use them safely will be passed
	down the supply chain by chemical manufacturers and importers through improved safety data
	sheets.
3.5	Safety data sheets (MSDS) detail health and safety information written in a standardised format
	and provided by the supplier or manufacturer of a substance. The MSDS will tell you if the substance
	is classified as a hazardous substance. It also provides information on handling, storage, and
	emergency measures to be taken.
3.6	COSHH Risk Assessment is a careful examination of hazardous substances within the workplace
	and an evaluation of their potential to cause harm.
3.7	CLP is European Regulation (EC) No 1272/2008 on classification, labelling and packaging of
	substances and mixtures came into force on 20 January 2009 in all European Union (EU) Member
	States, including the UK. It is known by its abbreviated form, 'the CLP Regulation' or 'CLP’.
	The EU CLP Regulation adopts the United Nations' Globally Harmonized System of the classification
	and labelling of chemicals (GHS) across all EU countries, including the UK, when the UK was an EU
	Member State.
4. Responsibilities 
4.1   	The Retail Director is responsible for ensuring all activities within the business are
	managed in accordance with regulatory requirements and company policies.
	The Group head of EHS is responsible for ensuring that the Management team implement and 	monitor this policy and procedures therein by providing support ensuring knowledge is maintained 	through training programmes.
	Retail Operations Manager is responsible for ensuring that their management team are aware of this
	policy, the policy requirements and that it is always adhered too.
	Retail Operations are responsible for ensuring that their management team are aware of this policy,
	the policy requirements and that it is always adhered too.
	Store Managers and operationally trained colleagues are responsible for ensuring that: 
• They understand the scope and content of risks within their area of control (including the use
   of chemicals).
• Bates submit MSDS documents to the Store along with their order upon delivery
• Hazardous substances are not used until they have been issued with a completed COSHH
   assessment from the EHS department
• Their colleagues are aware of this policy and the requirements within it.
• Their colleagues receive information, appropriate instruction, supervision, and training.
• The Store Manager will implement the control measures decided upon prior to the use of any
   product in their store.
• Communicate the findings from the COSHH risk assessments to their colleagues and obtain
   sign off to ensure they understand the findings and control measures.
• No modifications are made to any substance.
• Product being decanted are stored in the correct container provided and labelled accordingly
   Retail Operations will Communicate safe working instruction and obtain sign off to ensure they
   understand the process.
• Continually look at other risks not covered in the risk assessment and advise upon control
   measures in conjunction with the Health, Safety & Environmental Manager and Specialists.
	
4.2         EHS Manager is responsible for ensuring that:   	
• The policy is developed, implemented, communicated, and reviewed when required.
• Help in the creation/review of COSHH risk assessments as required.
• Audit the system, to ensure COSHH assessments are being completed, MSDS sheets are
  available, the inventory is up to date, chemicals are stored correctly, and colleagues are
  following the processes accordingly.
4. Responsibilities (Cont)
4.3   	EHS Specialist is responsible for ensuring that: 
• Developing, communicating, and reviewing COSHH risk assessments when
   required.
• Ensure the MSDS sheets are available and kept up to date.
• Ensure that Managers/Supervisors are communicating the COSHH assessments to colleagues and obtaining sign off.
• Maintaining the COSHH inventory.
• Monitor & audit compliance.
		
4.4        Colleagues are responsible for ensuring that they Cooperate with Holland and Barrett Ltd regarding 	compliance with the COSHH regulations and this policy:
• Do not mix chemicals when cleaning toilet areas. Only use one product at a time.
• Take reasonable care of their own safety and the safety of others who may be affected by their
   acts or omissions.
• Store chemicals in their designated location after use.
• Immediately inform their line manager if they suspect that the product is being used
   incorrectly.
• Ensure that they wear the appropriate PPE as identified within the COSHH risk assessment.
• Ensure that any information, instruction, and training is available to colleagues if required.
• Immediately report to their line manager any issues or spillages.
5. Procedures
5.1    This policy and procedure must be adhered to all times, if there are any concerns stop the works
	immediately and report immediately to the relevant manager.
5.2   	Use of Hazardous Substances must only be undertaken after a suitable and sufficient COSHH  Risk 	assessment has been undertaken.
5.3   	Any new hazardous products delivered into stores must be accompanied with a MSDS and EHS
	team notified.
5. Procedures (Cont)
5.4   	The procedures and hazards identified in the COSHH risk assessment are communicated to the
	colleagues that may use or be affected by its use.
5.5   	Copies of the COSHH risk assessment are given to the relevant members of staff. Copies are also
	kept in their folder and on the EHS database on the COSHH inventory for re-use, training, and staff
	induction purposes.
5.6  	All COSHH risk assessments are reviewed when required.
5.7   	Where substances must be used, aims to substitute these for a less harmful substance to minimise
	risks will be actioned.
5.8  	Local exhaust ventilation will be provided if reasonably practicable for areas that give off dusts or
	vapours.
6. General
6.1 	 This policy covers the use, storage, and transportation of products used in stores.
7. Training
7.1	COSHH awareness training will be carried out at the time of induction through Hive.
7.2	Additional training will be identified through the training needs analysis within the Retail sector.
	This will cover any specialist training for example COSHH training.
7.3	Training records will be kept up to date on the individual’s file
 8.  Planning for Accidents, Incident and 	Emergencies
8.1  	This policy aims to effectively, manage every identified risk that is involved with the use of a
	hazardous substance, however, there may be instances when accidents, such as spillages, could 	occur and may be damaging to an individual’s health.
8.2  	The risk assessment undertaken for each hazardous substance is kept with each substance, so
	that colleagues are aware of the emergency procedures and first aid.
8.3  	Incidents are responded to promptly, and the harmful effects are minimised where possible.
8.4  	Where substances must be used, aims to substitute these for a less harmful substance to minimise
	risks will be actioned.
8.5  	Emergency services are contacted immediately where the incident cannot be resolved by a
	trained colleague.
9. 	Audit
9.1 	 Regular audits will be carried out to ensure compliance to this policy and procedures.
10. Monitoring and Review
10.1	This policy and procedures will be monitored on a regular basis to ensure effectiveness and 	reviewed from time to time mainly due to changes in legislation or procedures. Any changes will be
	communicated to all employees through toolbox talks, PowerPoint, or Hive training programmes.
	.
11.0 Further information and advice
 	 https://www.hse.gov.uk/coshh/
 	 https://www.hse.gov.uk/fireandexplosion/dsear.htm
	 https://www.britsafe.org/training-and-learning/find-the-right-course-for-you/informational-resources/what-is-coshh/
	 https://www.legislation.gov.uk/uksi/2002/2677/contents/made
 	 https://www.hse.gov.uk/chemical-classification/legal/clp-regulation.htm
	 https://echa.europa.eu/regulations/reach/understanding-reach
 	 https://www.hse.gov.uk/legislation/hswa.htm
	 https://www.legislation.gov.uk/uksi/1999/3242/contents/made
 	 https://www.hse.gov.uk/pubns/guidance/sr24.pdf
	 https://www.netregs.org.uk/environmental-topics/materials-fuels-and-equipment/chemical-    storage/storage-handling-and-delivery-of-chemicals/
	 https://www.hse.gov.uk/health-surveillance/faqs.htm
 Customer Restrictions in Store Policy
1. Customer Bikes & Mobility Aids
1.1	It is against company policy to allow customers to bring bicycles, scooters, roller skates or other 	forms of transport into stores. 
1.2	The use, riding or storing of such equipment in store poses a potential hygiene risk or trip hazard to 	other customers and colleagues.
1.3	Please note that mobility aids including prams, push chairs, wheelchairs, mobility scooters, crutches 	and other walking aids are exempt from this due to the mobility requirements of the user. 
2. Colleague Bikes & Mobility Aids
2.1	Colleagues can store personal transport, including bikes, scooters, roller-skates and skateboards in 	the back of house areas providing the item:
> Does not block a walkway or fire exit.
> Is not placed in front of a call point or fire extinguisher. 
> Is not stored in the kitchen or other food preparation areas.
> Does not damage the environment i.e., mark the walls.
> Is not visible from the shop floor. 
2.2	Where possible colleagues should not bring their bike, scooter etc through the shop entrance during 	store opening hours.  During opening hours please use alternative back of house entrances. 
2.3	Bikes are left on site at your personal risk – H&B cannot be held responsible for any personal 	possessions including bikes and mobility aids left on site.
3. Dogs in Stores
3.1	Holland & Barrett are unable to allow non-working animals into store. 
3.2	Dogs (and other animals) pose a potential hygiene and / or allergy risk to customers and 	colleagues. 
3.3	Stores often have limited space and so dogs (or other animals) may cause a trip hazard. 
3.4	All service dogs, including but not limited to guide dogs, hearing assistance dogs, emotional support 	dogs, or service dogs in training are exempt from this due to the specific 	needs of the handler.
3.5	A symbol is displayed on the opening hours sign for customer visibility.
3. Dogs In Stores (cont.)
3.6	Assistance dogs are auxiliary aids and are covered by the Equality Act 2010, and are legally 	protected. Assistance dogs are not pets and are classed as auxiliary aids. It is illegal to discriminate 	against a disabled person, including their aids such as an assistance dog. It is also illegal to harm, 	assault, harass, or otherwise interfere with an assistance dog. 
3.7	Discrimination
	If a handler is treated unfavourably due to their disability and their aid (e.g., assistance dog), it is 	classed as discrimination which is illegal. 
3.8	The best way to not discriminate or harass an assistance dog or the handler is to treat them as you 	would any other disability aid. You would not stare at a prosthetic limb or touch a wheelchair; do 	not do these actions towards an assistance dog or their handler either. 
3.9	Recognising a service dog
	There are many types of service/assistance dogs including guide dogs, police dogs, seizure 	response dogs, diabetes alert dogs, autism assistance dogs, medical response dogs and many 	more. These animals undergo training and will be recognisable by a harness or jacket. 
3.10	This is not a requirement of the law;, however, some assistance dog handlers will carry an ID book 	giving information about the assistance dog. This again is not a legal requirement. Assistance dog 	users should not be refused a service if they do not possess an ID book. 
4. Emotional Support Animals
4.1	Emotional support animals provide comfort to a person with a mental or physical disability and do 	not receive formal training. 
4.2	As a health and wellness company it is important that we promote positive mental health and give 	customers support when needed. 
4.3	Although it is not a legal requirement, H&B welcome emotional support animals providing that 	the 	animal remains under the control of the handler at all times via a lead, bag or carry case.
4.4	Please note that shopping centres and Tesco units may not allow emotional support animals entry 	in line with their own policies. If situated in a Tesco or shopping centre, please check your centre’s 	policy with centre management. 
5. Cleaning Animal Accidents
5.1	In the unlikely event that an animal urinates or defecates in the store please exercise caution when 	cleaning. 
5.2	Accidents must be cleaned promptly and a wet floor/ hazard sign displayed. 
5.3	Assistance dog handlers are responsible for picking up their dog's faeces where possible.
5. Cleaning Animal Accidents (cont.)
5.4	Colleagues must wear gloves and clean using antibacterial cleaner following the steps below: 
> Display a warning sign close to the area.
> Wash's hands and put on gloves.
> Remove any remaining waste with blue roll and dispose of in a black bin liner. If the animal handler is carrying poo bags these can be used instead. Spray the area with antibacterial cleaner and wipe clean.
> Damp-mop the affected area using hot water and floor cleaner.
> Remove gloves and wash hands.
> Remove the hazard sign only when the area is dry.
5.5	Stores can temporarily close to collect cleaning supplies if lone trading. 
6. Customer Use of Toilets
6.1 	As a general rule, we do not offer the use of our colleague toilets to the public due to H&S and 	possible public Liability issues.  As the customer would need to be escorted to and from the back-	of-house location, which may not always be practical in all scenarios, such as lone working.  
	To support customers in this instance please make sure all colleagues are aware of where the 	nearest public toilets are located.
6.2 	There may be exceptions to the above, and a 'common sense' approach should be applied on a 	store-by-store basis.  These exceptions may be, but not exclusively:
> The customer has produced a Medical Card.
> The customer has a small child who needs the toilet.
> The customer is clearly desperate or in distress.
6.3	In the above exceptional circumstances, the customer MUST be escorted to the toilets and back. 	If this is not possible at the time, the 	customer should not be permitted to use the facilities and 	should be directed to the nearest public toilets.
6.4	Toilets must be clean, tidy, in good working order with provision of hot water, soap and hand drying 	facilities and that the route to the toilets is free from obstruction.
6.5 	Any customer you allow to use the toilet must be made aware if there are any stairs on the route to 	ensure they can manage them safely.
Date Checking Policy
1. Statement
Holland and Barrett Ltd. is committed to developing food safety policies and procedures and, in doing so, has implemented this date checking policy to ensure safe and good quality food is sold within Holland & Barrett stores and we are compliant with Food Safety Regulations.
This Date checking policy is a tool to ensure that all products with best before dates and use by dates are monitored, checked, reduced, and removed from sale before their expiry date.
The goal is to minimize and control the risk of products being sold after their expiry date, with exceptions of items that qualify for ‘Too Good to waste’, please follow this link to see the ‘Reduction Bandings’ document.
Procedures will be reviewed periodically, and any updates must be actioned.
This policy sets out guidance on company procedures to ensure that safe and good quality food is sold within Holland & Barrett stores.
2. Purpose
2.1	The purpose of this policy is to ensure that all products with expiry dates are checked and reduced 	for a quick sale or are disposed of to reduce and eliminate the risk of selling products that have 	expired and are not safe for consumption.
2.2	To ensure date checking is completed in line with policies and procedures and we are legally 	compliant in line with Food Safety Regulations.
2.3	To ensure that safe and good quality products are sold from H&B stores.
2.4	This policy is also intended to increase employee’s awareness and provide relevant information to 	all employees. It sets the legal obligation and measures all employees must take to ensure 	satisfactory date checking process is followed and we are compliant with Food Safety Regulations
3. Objectives
3.1	The objective of this policy is to establish the minimum requirements for maintaining a satisfactory 	date checking process.
4. Scope
4.1	This policy applies to all Holland & Barrett stores in the UK and ROI.
4.2	This document provides the core standards that must be achieved by Holland and Barrett Ltd to 	ensure compliance with Food Safety Regulations.
5. Food Safety Regulations
UNITED KINGDOM (England, Wales, Scotland Northern Ireland)
5.1 	The Food Safety Act 1990
5.2 	The Food Safety Act 1990 (Amendment) Regulations 2004
5.3 	The Food Safety and Hygiene (England) Regulations 2013
5.4 	Regulation (EC) No 852/2004 on the hygiene of foodstuffs
5.5 	The Food Information Regulations 2014
5.6 	The Weights and Measures Act 1985
5.7 	The Food Hygiene (Scotland) Regulations 2006
5.8 	The Food Hygiene (Wales) Regulations 2006
5.9	The Food Hygiene (Northern Ireland) Regulations 2006 
REPUBLIC OF IRELAND
5.10	Regulation (EC) 852/2004 on the Hygiene of Foodstuffs
5.11	EC (Hygiene of Foodstuffs) Regulations 2006 – 2010
5.12	Regulation (EC) 178/2002 on the General Principles and Requirements of Food Law
5.13	EC (General Food Law) Regulations 2007 – 2012
5.14	Regulation (EU) No. 1169/2011 on the Provision of Food Information to Consumers
5.15	Food Safety Authority of Ireland Act 1998 and Associated Regulations
5.16	Food Hygiene Regulations 1950 – 89
The law sets out the basic requirements for the levels that are expected within all food businesses from hygiene to temperature control through to ensuring food is correctly labelled, so the consumer is not mislead.
6. Responsibilities
6.1 	The Retail Director 
	• Is responsible for ensuring all activities within the business are managed in accordance with 	regulatory requirements and company policies.
6.2 	The Group head of EHS 
	• Is responsible for ensuring that the Management team implement and monitor this policy and its 	procedures by providing support in ensuring knowledge is maintained through training programmes.
6. Responsibilities (cont.)
6.3 	Retail Operations Manager 
	• Is responsible for ensuring that their management team are aware of this policy, the policy 	requirements and that it is always adhered too. 
6.4 	Retail Operations 
	• Are responsible for ensuring that their management team are aware of this policy, the policy 	requirements and that it is always adhered too. 
6.5 	EHS Manager is responsible for ensuring that: 
	• The policy is developed, implemented, communicated, and reviewed when required. 
	• Monitor and audit compliance in stores to ensure that this policy is followed. 
6.6 	Store Managers and Operationally Trained colleagues are responsible for ensuring that: 
	• Date checking is completed every week. Required sections to check are uploaded onto the Hand 	Held Terminal at the beginning of the week. 
	• All checks are recorded using the Dynamic Date Checker App (DDC) on the Hand Held Terminal 	  (HHT). 
	• All products past expiry date are removed from sale and disposed of; except for items that qualify for 	‘Too Good to Waste’ which can be sold up to one month after the expiry date. 
6.7 	All Colleagues are responsible for ensuring that: 
	• They co-operate with Holland and Barrett Ltd to ensure compliance with the Food Safety 	Regulations and this policy. 
	• They ensure all checks are completed with integrity and in line with their training and this policy. 
	• All products past expiry date are removed from sale and disposed; except for items that qualify 	for ‘Too Good to Waste’ which can be sold up to one month after its expiry date.
7. Procedures
7.1 	This policy and procedure must be adhered to all times by all colleagues. 
7.2 	This policy applies to all products with best before dates and use by dates. 
7.3 	Use by Date, this code is used on food that goes off quickly such as chilled products; these 	products are intended for consumption within a specified period of time. After this date, the food 	may be unfit to eat. 
7.4 	All products with Use by Date must be removed from sale at the end of the trade of the expiry date 	and disposed. 
7. Procedures (cont.)
7.5 	Best Before Date, this code is used on food that is non-perishable, like cereals and canned 	products. Best before dates relate to the quality of a product. Should a product exceed its best 	before day its quality may be compromised but it will remain safe to consume or use. This can apply 	to a range of products including dried, canned or frozen goods. 
7.6 	All products with best before dates are divided into Too Good To Waste and Not Too Good To 	Waste 	categories. To see the full list, please follow this link to the ‘Reduction Bandings’ 	document.
7.7 	Depending on the product category, the check frequency will be different. To see the full list, 	please follow this link to the ‘Reduction Bandings’ document.
7.8 	Close to expiry products, expiry dates and quantities are electronically recorded using the Dynamic 	Date Checker App (DDC) on the Hand Held Terminal (HHT). 
7.9 	As part of the Dynamic Date Checking process all wall bays, gondolas and fridges have a unique 	QR code assigned to each product category. This assigns products to specific bays which allows 	colleagues to track close to expiry products which have been recorded in the DDC App on the HHT. 
7.10	When completing the Routine Scan all products classified as non-food with an expiry date less than 	12 months of shelf life need to be scanned and then the expiry date and quantities entered. 
7.11 	When completing the Routine Scan all products classified as food with an expiry date less than 4 	months (16 weeks) of shelf life need to be scanned then the expiry date and quantity entered. 
7.12 	When completing a Routine Scan using the Dynamic Date Checker, users are prompted to check for 	all close to expiry products in all locations in store: overhead cupboards, undershelf storage, stock 	rooms and promotional locations to ensure that all close to expiry products are accounted for and 	recorded. 
7.13 	In addition to the Routine Scan close to expiry products can be recorded using the Ad-Hoc Scan. 	This is used for all lines not captured or missed during the Routine Scan. 
7.14 	Completed Routine Scans must be confirmed as completed in the Applied Principles Health & 	Safety 	App on the HHT under the Weekly Date Checking task. 
7.15 	Completion of the Weekly Date Checking task can be reviewed using the report ‘Applied Principles 	Dashboard for Company’ published every week by Retail Reporting. Every store should achieve 	100% compliance every week. 
7. Procedures (cont.)
7.16	Items recorded as short dated have a got a unique QR code label which needs to be placed on the 	original bar code of the product. The label must not obstruct any important information such as 	allergen information, nutritional information, directions for use, the expiry date or the BBE date. 	Tracked items are sold using this unique QR code and once scanned at the till updates the item 	quantity in the system.
 
7.17 	Store colleagues must check Further Reductions on the Dynamic Date Checker daily to review items 	that require further reductions in the next two weeks. 
7.18 	The full list of close to expiry products with expiry dates, quantities and location in store can be 	accessed and reviewed using the link for ‘Destiny Service App’. 
7.19 	Close to expiry products are to be reduced for a quick sale by a particular percentage depending on 	the expiry date and category of the product as well as the store’s turnover. 
7.20 	Reduced products are marked with a reduced label, with the message highlighted in red – Reduced 	to Clear Labels are placed at the front of the product stating the price and product name and at the 	back of the product over the original barcode. Reduced labels contain a unique QR code which will 	adjust the quantity of short dated lines recorded during the Routine Scan or Ad-Hoc Scan. 
7.21	Reduced To Clear lines are kept with the category or placed on the ‘Clearance’ bay or allocated 	space / location depending on store layout. 
7.22 	Some products with a Best Before Date can be sold up to one month after passing its expiry date 	following the ‘Too Good To Waste’ (TGTW) process. 
7.23 	To see the full list of reduction bandings and TGTW, please follow this link to the ‘Reduction 	Bandings’ document.
7.24 	Products with a Use by Date cannot be sold under any circumstances after passing the expiry date. 
7. Procedures (cont.)
7.25 	All expired products must be removed from sale immediately after passing the expiry date and 	disposed following the waste disposal procedure. 
7.26 	This Date Checking Policy also applies to products purchased for colleagues’ consumption. Any 	date expired products purchased by store colleagues must be kept in their personal lockers and not 	kept in a shared location. 
7.27 	This Date Checking Policy applies to chilled products with a Use By Date purchased for colleague 	consumption. The colleague fridge must be checked daily, and all date expired products must be 	removed and disposed of immediately after the expiry date. 
7.28 	Store Managers are accountable and responsible for correct date rotation and controls in stores. 
7.29 	Products with shorter dates must be sold first. 
7.30 	Products arriving with delivery must be checked for short dates. All close to expiry products must be 	recorded using the Ad-Hoc Check in the DDC app on the HHT and either put out for sale or placed 	in storage.
7.31 	Loss Prevention Team – The execution of date checking will be checked as part of Compliance 	Visits to ensure adherence to Company policy. Ad-hoc checks may also be carried out as part of 	routine Loss Prevention visits or where data has indicated potential non-compliance. 
7.32 	Retail Team – Regional Managers receive the Date Checking Compliance Report every week 	showing compliance at store level. Regional Managers will check Hand Held terminals during the 	store visits for compliance alongside reporting. 
7.33 	The Environment, Health and Safety Team check completion of Weekly Date Checking for the past 	13 weeks using the dashboard report ‘Applied Principles Dashboard for Company’ and Principles 	Suites to review compliance for the purpose of EHS Store Compliance Audits. When in store 	sample date checking is completed the EHS Team will ensure that no date expired products are on 	sale. Stores are expected to achieve 100% compliance. Regional Managers are notified as part of 	the EHS Store Compliance Audit if date expired products are found. 
7.34 	New colleagues are trained on date checking during their first 12 weeks as part of the operational 	training level 1 program. 
7. Procedures (cont.)
7.25 	All expired products must be removed from sale immediately after passing the expiry date and 	disposed following the waste disposal procedure. 
7.26 	This Date Checking Policy also applies to products purchased for colleagues’ consumption. Any 	date expired products purchased by store colleagues must be kept in their personal lockers and not 	kept in a shared location. 
7.27 	This Date Checking Policy applies to chilled products with a Use By Date purchased for colleague 	consumption. The colleague fridge must be checked daily, and all date expired products must be 	removed and disposed of immediately after the expiry date. 
7.28 	Store Managers are accountable and responsible for correct date rotation and controls in stores. 
7.29 	Products with shorter dates must be sold first. 
7.30 	Products arriving with delivery must be checked for short dates. All close to expiry products must be 	recorded using the Ad-Hoc Check in the DDC App on the HHT and either put out for sale or placed 	in storage.
7.31 	Loss Prevention Team – The execution of date checking will be checked as part of Compliance 	Visits to ensure adherence to Company policy. Ad-hoc checks may also be carried out as part of 	routine Loss Prevention visits or where data has indicated potential non-compliance. 
7.32 	Retail Team – Regional Managers receive the Date Checking Compliance Report every week 	showing compliance at store level. Regional Managers will check Handheld terminals during the 	store visits for compliance alongside reporting. 
7.33 	The Environment, Health and Safety Team check completion of Weekly Date Checking for the past 	13 weeks using the dashboard report ‘Applied Principles Dashboard for Company’ and Principles 	Suites to review compliance for the purpose of EHS Store Compliance Audits. When in store 	sample date checking is completed the EHS Compliance Officer will ensure that no date expired 	products are on sale. Stores are expected to achieve 100% compliance. Regional Managers are 	notified as part of the EHS Store Compliance Audit if date expired products are found. 
7.34 	New colleagues are trained on date checking during their first 12 weeks as part of the operational 	training level 1 program. 
8. Commercial Override Reductions
8.1	Commercial override reductions MUST only be used to reduce products that have been centrally 	communicated.
8.2	If commercial override reductions are used for any products that are NOT centrally 	communicated, this could lead to investigation and disciplinary action to be taken.
Discount Policy
1. Discount Overview
At Holland & Barrett we offer a wide range of fantastic discounts to both our colleagues and our customers. We do this to ensure that everyone gets the most out of shopping with us so they can add quality years to life. These discounts also work in conjunction with some of our great promotional offers, helping health and wellness be more accessible to everyone.
Major discounts offered:
• Colleague
• Student
• Blue Light Card
• Click & Collect
• Vegan/Vegetarian
• Friends & Family
• Magazine/Newspaper Coupons
• Influencer/Event
• Bounceback
• Online Overlay
• New store/Refit
• Instore Threshold
• Web & App Exclusive Offers
Because we offer a wide range of discounts, this policy has been created to ensure they’re used properly and as intended.
Whilst each discount has its own unique rules, the following apply to ALL discounts:
1.1	No discount can be used in conjunction with any other discount. If two discounts are presented, 	only the highest discount will be applied.
1.2	No discount can be used in conjunction with BBE/Short Dated reductions.
1.3	No discount can be used on products with in-store reductions such as: reduced to clear, short 	dated or outlet specific reductions.
1.4	Breaching the discount policy may result in an investigation which could lead to formal disciplinary 	proceedings in line with the company disciplinary policy and could lead to dismissal.
1.5	If you are unsure or need more clarification on anything covered in the discount policy, speak to 	your line manager for further guidance.
1.6	For a full overview of which discounts and promotions can be used in conjunction with each other, 	see the Discount Matrix found HERE
2. Colleague Discount
As a H&B Colleague we want you to enjoy our products and to support this, you are entitled to an amazing 25% colleague discount. You can make purchases in store using your Colleague Discount QR code, or an online purchase using an account linked to your e-mail for the discount to be applied.
Detailed below are the particulars of the colleague discount policy that you need to know:
2.1	Your colleague discount is for use by you and must not be used by anyone else. The discount is not 	transferable for friends and family use. 
2.2	Colleague discount can be used online on the official Holland & Barrett website if you have 	registered your RFL and H&B account to the same e-mail. This also allows you to get your RFL 	points.
2.3	When you make a purchase in store, you must get another colleague to process your sale. You 	cannot serve yourself. The only exception to this is in the event of unforeseen circumstances that 	result in you lone trading without notice, such as a colleague leaving due to sickness. In these 	unforeseen circumstances you must do the following:
> Inform your Manager or Regional Manager that a purchase is required.
> You must make the purchase using your RFL account.
> The receipt must be kept with purchases whilst in store.
2.4	If you are working in store, you must keep the signed till receipt for any goods purchased until the 	product is consumed or leaves the store.
2.5	Products that are out of date or have split packaging and are no longer in a resaleable condition are 	not allowed to be purchased, consumed or taken off the premises.
2.6	Products purchased using your colleague discount cannot be resold anywhere, including online 	selling 	platforms, car boot sales etc. If there is a particularly high volume of any one product being 	purchased, this is tracked via our online security systems, whereby, it may be flagged for further 	discussions with you.
2.7	Throughout the year we may offer exclusive extra discounts for colleagues, particularly around 	Christmas. Please ensure you refer to the full T&Cs associated with each discount event to see any 	restrictions.
2.8	Colleague discount must not be applied to the £50 colleague allowance.
2.9	Only current employees are entitled to this discount. If you leave H&B or are dismissed, you are no 	longer entitled to colleague discount.
3. Student Discount
H&B offer student discount in store and online. There are two ways in which a student can claim this when in store: 
3.1	Customers with a UNiDAYS account are entitled to 10% off qualifying purchases online only.
3.2	Customers with a valid Student ID card are entitled to 10% off qualifying purchases in store. Before 	applying the discount, the colleague must check that the customer can provide photo ID which 	matches the customers appearance, the expiry date must also be checked to ensure validity. The ID 	card holder must make the purchase.
3.3	During key periods, we may flex up the UNiDAYS discount for online purchases only. These will be 	considered “limited time only” discounts.
3.4	Offers cannot be used in conjunction with any other discount codes and applies to qualifying 	products only. The offer excludes At-Home Testing Kits.
3.5	We reserve the right to withdraw the offer without prior notice.  Exclusions may change and all 	purchases are subject to availability.
4. Blue Light Card Discount
NHS workers and Blue light card holders can receive a 5% discount by showing the Blue Light phone application or by carrying a blue light card or other Emergency Services ID card e.g., Armed Forces ID, Ambulance, Fire Service etc.
4.1	The ID card holder must make the purchase.
4.2	Before applying the discount, the colleague must check that the customer can provide photo ID 	which matches the customers appearance, the expiry date must also be checked to ensure validity.
4.3	Alternatively, the customer can confirm identity by showing a bank card with the same name as 	detailed on the NHS/Blue Light card.
4.4	This discount is applied to qualifying products only and excludes Protein Powders, Protein Bars, Pre-	Workout, At-Home Testing Kits and H&B Vitamins & Supplements Value range.
4.5	It is valid for purchases made in store and online. For further information or to check for 	amendments please refer to the H&B website.
5. Click & Collect
Upon a customer collecting a Click & Collect order in store, the customer may be entitled to a 10% discount on an instore purchase made on the same day.
5.1 	The customer must have collected a Click & Collect order in store with full proof of purchase to 	be able to claim this discount.
5.2	The customer can only claim this discount on the same day the Click & Collect order was 	collected in store.
5.3	The 10% discount must be applied using the Click & Collect discount barcode scanned at the till.
5.4	Using the Click & Collect discount barcode with customers who are not collecting a Click & 	Collect order on the same day as an instore purchase may lead to investigation and disciplinary 	action to be taken.
6. Vegetarian/Vegan Society Discount
The 'Vegetarian Society’ and the 'Vegan Society’ are groups that encourage people to eat a plant-based diet and offer support and ways to be sustainable. People who have signed up to join the ‘Vegetarian Society’ or ‘Vegan Society’ will receive a card that will entitle them to 10% off in our stores. If a customer enquires after one of these cards, please refer them to either the ‘Vegetarian Society’ website or the ‘Vegan Society’ website.
6.1	If a customer presents either of these cards at the checkout the colleague must ensure validity by 	checking that the customer can provide photo ID which matches the customers appearance, the 	expiry date must also be checked to ensure validity. 
6.2	Alternatively, the customer can confirm identity by showing a bank card with the same name as 	detailed on their membership card. 
6.3	Only the membership holder can use the discount with their purchase.
7. Friends & Family Discount
On occasion Holland & Barrett will run a friends and family discount. Communication will be provided prior to launch to enable colleagues to share the redeemable barcode. The communication will notify colleagues of the dates that the discount will be active and will provide any necessary instructions. 
General terms and conditions apply:
7.1	The discount is only applicable to customers with the barcode which may be provided by either a 	paper copy or a digital copy.
7.2	The discount can be applied by scanning the barcode on the till.
7. Friends & Family Discount (cont.)
7.3	Customers can redeem the discount online by quoting a code at checkout.
7.4 	The customer must be the one to request this discount when making a purchase in store. If you offer 	this discount without a prompt from the customer first, this could lead to investigation and 	disciplinary action to be taken.
8. Magazine/Newspaper Coupons
8.1	Discount coupons from magazines and newspapers should be processed as per the T&Cs stated 	on the coupon and may not be used in conjunction with other offers unless clearly stated. 
8.2	The customer must present the coupon in store; colleagues should not be showing the customer 	the coupon and then applying the discount.
8.3	Coupons must be in date and genuine (you must not accept screenshots or photocopies).
8.4	Coupons must be for a product we sell in stores.
8.5	It must be redeemable in our stores. Sometimes, third party suppliers make a deal with a specific 	retailer. In which case, although we may sell the product, we would not accept the coupon.
8.6	If the coupon can only be used for a specific product, the customer must be purchasing that 	product for the coupon to be redeemed.
9. Influencer/Event Discount
To support in engaging with the community, we distribute leaflets at events across the country which contain discount codes to be used in both our stores and online. We also issue promotional codes on social media through our influencers content to help engage with a wider audience.
9.1	The discount is only applicable instore to customers with the physical leaflet with a valid discount 	barcode. 	 
9.2	This discount can be applied online using a valid discount/promotional code.
9.3	The discount barcode or discount/promotional code must be within date to be redeemed.
9.4	Only the original leaflet can be used to claim discount instore. Under no circumstances can you 	accepted a photocopies of the original leaflet to apply this discount.
9.5	Full Terms & Conditions are outlined on the voucher and should be followed when applying this 	discount.
9.6	The customer must be the one to request this discount when making a purchase in store. If you offer 	this discount without a prompt from the customer first, this could lead to investigation and 	disciplinary action to be taken.
10.Bounceback Discounts
Bouncebacks are offers that we issue to customers on the back of a them making a purchase with us, either on receipt, for customers that shop in store, or via an email, for customer who shop online. This is to encourage our customers to come back and shop with us within the month.
10.1	This discount can only be offered to customers with a valid RFL account.
10.2	This discount can only be used by the customer who made the original purchase.
10.3	The customer must either have a valid receipt or email with the discount barcode on to be able to 	claim this discount.
10.4	This discount is for single use only. You must not use the provided code on more than one 	transaction. The bounce back coupon code must be defaced by a colleague to prevent multiple 	use.
10.5	Customers must spend a threshold amount to redeem this discount. This threshold depends on the 	number of points being used or the percentage discount (depending on the offer).
11. Online Overlays
As an omni-channel retailer it is important that we always offer our customers a seamless experience, it is important to recognise though that different customer profiles shop online compared to in-store. This means we will run promotions, such as an online overlay. We will always offer these deals in store if a customer asks about them, but you should not advertise these in-store unless specifically requested to by the communication team. 
11.1	To transact these through the till you MUST use the trigger bar code provided to the customer, 	either on the website or via email.
11.2	The trigger barcode MUST be displayed on the customers device only and the customer must be 	the one to request this discount when making a purchase in store.
11.3	The offer must still be valid and the criteria for accepting the discount must be met, such as a 	threshold spend, for the discount to be applied to the transaction.
11.4	If the voucher isn't scanning then you must transact the discount using 'non scan coupon' to honour 	the deal but then must follow up by logging the scanning issue to retail assist. The non-scanned 	coupon process must be followed:[LINK TO NON-SCANNED COUPON PROCESS TO BE ADDED]
11.5	Monitoring of non-scan coupons is completed by our internal audit team and any suspicion of 	fraudulent activity will be investigated and will be treated in accordance with our Disciplinary Policy.
11.6	If you offer this discount without a prompt from the customer first or centrally communicated, this 	could lead to investigation and disciplinary action to be taken.
On our website or app (digital) we may state a special offer such as 15% off if you shop today – this is online only, not in store.
12. New/Refit Store Coupons and Discounts
12.1	The store colleague must check the store name on the leaflet matches the store the discount is 	being claimed in, before accepting the discount. If the store name does not match, unless 	centrally communicated, the discount must be refused.
12.2	The store colleague must check the coupon is within the valid date range window displayed on the 	leaflet. If the coupon is not within the valid date range period, the discount must be refused.
12.3	Promotional leaflets must be distributed to members of the public outside of the store and not 	given to customers already in store.
12.4	Store colleagues must not give this discount to customers unless they present a valid coupon at 	the point of purchase.
12.5	Failure to comply with this policy could lead to investigation and disciplinary action to be taken.
13. Instore Threshold Discount
An instore threshold discount is applied when a customer spends a set value, they receive money off their purchase. During key periods of the year, selected stores will have a threshold discount applied to their sales. These threshold discounts will help drive footfall and increase the amount our customers spend with us.
13.1	This discount can only be applied in stores that have been selected centrally.
13.2	You may only apply this discount during the communicated date range.
13.3	Failure to comply with this policy could lead to investigation and disciplinary action to be taken.
14. Web & App Exclusive Offers
At Holland & Barrett, we offer exclusive offers and discounts for our web and app customers to ensure they get the most out of shopping with us, however they choose to shop. Sometimes, this will mean that prices online may differ from our instore pricing.
14.1	You should always prioritise encouraging the customer to first consider the offer in store
	(as it will often be a multibuy), suggesting complementary/additional products they
	could purchase on the offer.
14.2	AS A LAST RESORT ONLY, you can honour the online digital deals only if a customer explicitly 	calls out the differing online offer. Process through the till by using a Price Override with the reason 	code, ‘Incorrect Scan’.
14.3 	Any products reduced this way will be removed from any in-store multibuys.
14.4	You should never introduce the customers to the differing online offer so that you can
	process it as another deal in store, the customer always needs to be the one requesting it.
14.5	You should not fulfil the different digital offer for more than 3 items at once, in this instance
	you should place an Order in Store instead.
14.6	Failure to comply with this policy could lead to investigation and disciplinary action to be taken.
Faulty Products Policy
1. Statement
Faulty products are products that are not fit for purpose, as described, they are defective, or not as they should be from a quality, usage, visual expectation, or a safety perspective. These products cannot be sold to customers. 
2. What is not a faulty product
2.1	Products that have been damaged upon delivery and are not in the intended original condition. This 	includes items that have been smashed, crushed, or items where the container has ruptured due to 	excessive movement. For example:
> Products damaged in store e.g., falling off a shelf & smashing. 
> Products that have been delivered with the incorrect language label e.g., Dutch labels. 
> Products that have been delivered into store that have already expired or expired on the shelf.
3. Customer returns a faulty product
3.1	As part of consumer rights, if a customer returns a product that is faulty or has caused an adverse 	reaction they are entitled to a refund, exchange or credit note within a longer timeframe following the 	initial purchase. Proof of purchase must be provided, and the item being returned must be within its 	expiry date, Best Before/Best Before End (BBE) date or period after opening (PAO) timescale. The 	customer must also return the product to store to be eligible for a return. If the product is not one which 	has an expiry date, BBE date, or a POA timescale, then a refund/exchange should be given within 6 	months of the date of purchase.
3.2 	If the customer does not have a receipt and they are an RFL customer, we can trace the transaction 	through their RFL data. If they are not an RFL customer it is not unreasonable to ask for alternative 	proof of purchase such as, a bank statement. When processing a return please state that what form of 	proof of purchase was provided on the returns form.
3.3 	When processing a return please state that what form of proof of purchase was provided on the returns 	form.
3.4	 Further detail on this can be found on Gov.UK for UK and Gov.IE for Republic of Ireland stores. 
3.5	 For further information on returns and refunds please see the Refunds and Returns Policy.
Food Safety Policy
1. 	Statement
1.1	At all times we must aim to achieve the highest possible standards of food hygiene and food safety 	within our stores. As we sell many natural products that do not contain additives or preservatives, this is 	particularly important to us. 
	Under Food Safety Law we all have duties to ensure the food we sell is safe and of good quality. Our 	Procedures will be reviewed periodically, and any updates must be actioned. 
	The pages in this section set out the company procedures to ensure that safe and good quality food is 	sold from our stores.
2. 	Our Aim
2.1	To ensure all food sold is of the highest quality and meets the needs of our customers. 
2.2	To ensure all food sold is safe. 
2.3	To have clean and hygienic stores. 
2.4	To present a clean and hygienic image to our customers. 
2.5	To ensure we comply with the current Food Safety Law.
3. 	What Do We Gain?
3.1 	Happy and satisfied customers. 
3.2	Happy and satisfied enforcement bodies. 
3.3	Happy team members. 
3.4	Reduced waste. 
3.5	Reduced complaints. 
3.6	Increased profits. 
3.7	Increased sales. 
3.8	Increased efficiency. 
4. 	Food Safety Law
4.1 	The law sets out the basic requirements for the levels that are expected within all food businesses from 	hygiene to temperature control, through to ensuring food is correctly labelled so the consumer is not 	mislead.
	Anyone who sells or processes food and drink must comply with Food Safety Law. The main pieces of 	law that we must comply with are:
	UNITED KINGDOM (England, Wales, Scotland Northern Ireland)
4.2 	The Food Safety Act 1990
4.3 	The Food Safety Act 1990 (Amendment) Regulations 2004
4.4 	The Food Safety and Hygiene (England) Regulations 2013
4.5 	Regulation (EC) No 852/2004 on the hygiene of foodstuffs
4.6 	The Food Information Regulations 2014
4.7 	The Weights and Measures Act 1985
4.8 	The Food Hygiene (Scotland) Regulations 2006
4.9 	The Food Hygiene (Wales) Regulations 2006
4.10	The Food Hygiene (Northern Ireland) Regulations 2006 
	REPUBLIC OF IRELAND
4.11	Regulation (EC) 852/2004 on the Hygiene of Foodstuffs
4.12	EC (Hygiene of Foodstuffs) Regulations 2006 – 2010
4.13	Regulation (EC) 178/2002 on the General Principles and Requirements of Food Law
4.14	EC (General Food Law) Regulations 2007 – 2012
4.15	Regulation (EU) No. 1169/2011 on the Provision of Food Information to Consumers
4.16	Food Safety Authority of Ireland Act 1998 and Associated Regulations
4.17	Food Hygiene Regulations 1950 – 89
5. 	Food Safety Training
5.1	All store colleagues are given basic food safety information during the company induction. This 	information covers: 
• Temperature control and monitoring 
• Pest control 
• Hygiene and cleaning 
• ‘Use By’ and ‘Best Before’ dates 
5.2	All new colleagues are trained on basic food safety during their first 12 weeks as part of operational 	training level 1. This training is completed on the hive our digital training platform. In addition to the 	training on the hive, this manual provides information about food safety which colleagues can refer to.
6. 	Hazard Analysis
6.1	Hazard analysis is a process used to identify potential points of failure or risk in your food safety 	management system, and to help you identify and develop suitable controls to reduce and manage 	those risks. 
6.2	We do this by looking at each stage the food goes through, identify any problems that could occur (the 	hazards), stop the problems from happening (the controls) and check the controls we have in place 	(monitoring). The hazards could be:
	
• Chemical (cleaning products, pesticides).
• Microbiological (mould, bacteria).
• Physical (hairs, wood, string).
6.3	Controls work to stop the hazards from occurring. Please see appendix 1 for example.
6.4 	So, as you can see, the control here is storing the chilled product in the chiller. We carry out controls in 	our everyday work, but often don’t realise we are doing them. Other controls include checking packaging 	of the stock on your deliveries, ensuring temperatures of chillers are correct and rotating stock. We 	monitor these controls by taking temperatures, visual checks and we keep records of them.
6.5 	Appendix 2 demonstrates the steps the food follows once it has arrived at the store.
6.6	At each stage we must stop the hazards from occurring by following the controls and monitoring 	procedures.
7. Temperature Control Statement
7.1	This policy has been put in place to: 
• Ensure monitoring of fresh food temperatures takes place to ensure safe food. 
• Ensure that appropriate corrective actions have been put in place when required. 
• Ensure all stores comply with legal requirements for monitoring food temperatures. 
• Ensure that checking of temperatures of chilled deliveries takes place. 
• Ensuring that temperature thermometers and probes are used correctly and calibrated as required, to ensure accuracy of temperature monitoring and records. 
• 8. 	Temperature Control Principles
• 8.1	The legal maximum storage temperature for chilled fresh food is +8°c but we aim to store chilled food at 	+5°c or below, so we do not exceed legal requirements and to meet suppliers’ storage recommendations. 	There is no legal requirement to chill canned drinks this is purely for quality and customer experience. 
• 8.2	Some chilled foods have a 'use by' or 'best before' date and shows recommended refrigerator storage 	conditions on the label. Chilled food must be kept at the correct temperature to ensure chilled food is 	safe to consume. 
• 8.3	Chilled food must not be sold after the ‘use by date’ or if above +8°c , refer to the corporate 'too good to 	waste' and 'date checking' policy for guidance on chilled 'best before date' products. 
• 8.4	It is important the correct way to check the temperatures of your chillers is followed to ensure we are 	adhering to legal requirements regarding the temperature of our chillers and the selling of chilled food. 
• 8.5	Temperature checks are to be completed 15 minutes before opening and no later than 9am and again at 	around 1pm. On a Sunday one check 15 minutes before opening and one halfway through trade is 	expected.
• 8.6	Temperature checks must be recorded in Applied Principles Health & Safety App under Daily Pre-	Opening Checks and Daily Temperature Checks. You must record the temperature and take a photo of 	the chiller thermometer or digital thermometer and scan the corresponding chiller QR Code for 	compliance record keeping when recording the temperature in the Applied Principles Health & Safety 	App. 
• 8.7	The Store Manager is accountable for ensuring that the store team is fully trained and competent on 	temperature control procedures. 
• 8.8	It is the responsibility of the whole store team to ensure temperature checking for all fresh food chillers 	within the store is done twice daily. 
• 8.9	Environmental Health Officers (EHO) can request to view your temperature submissions during their 	store visits. You will need to be able to confidently talk the EHO through the Temperature Control 	Policy. Historic temperature control submissions can be requested from EHS Admin and emailed 	directly to the EHO. 
11. 	Using Your Temperature Probe
11.1	To ensure you are monitoring your temperatures correctly please follow the guidance below. 
11.2	Dos and Don’ts of using Temperature Probes are listed below: 
	Do 
• Take off the protective blue covering from the penetration probe before using it. 
• Pierce the product in the centre whilst on a flat surface. 
• Keep your fingers at a safe distance away from the probe during use. 
• Make sure your probe is calibrated monthly. 
• Clean your probe after use with a sanitised wipe or sanitiser spray and a cloth. 
• Insert the air temperature probe in between packs or into the product and leave for the temperature reading to stabilise. 
• Ensure all team members know where your probes are kept. 
• Call EHS Admin Department for assistance or queries with the process or equipment on 02476215500.
	Don’t 
• Pierce the product with the penetration probe whilst holding it as you could stab your hands. 
• Place fingers in the way of the spike. 
• Allow the temperature probes (air or penetration) to touch the metal chiller shelfs as this may affect your temperature readings. 
• Leave your digital probe sat in the chiller all day, it should be put back in its blue storage box when not in use, as leaving it sat in the chiller throughout the day may damage your probe and compromise your readings.
12. 	Finding the Best Place to Take the Temperature
12.1	Leave the chiller thermometers to the back of the middle shelf and use the middle shelf to take any air 	or product readings with your digital probe. Please view appendix 5 for more detail.
13. 	Storage & Display
13.1	Storing products correctly will make sure that they last their shelf life. Correct storage is when food is 	kept in the right conditions, at the correct temperatures and for the appropriate time period, this helps 	to: 
	• Avoid spoilage. 
	• Prevent waste. 
	• Preserve the foods taste, appearance and nutritional value. 
	• Keep within the law. 
	General rules for safe storage:
	• Handle all stock with care. 
	• Store all products in the appropriate storage areas, following any storage instructions on the label. 
	• Protect food from contamination. 
	• Store food off the floor. 
	• Stack shelves carefully without overloading; leave enough space around the boxes for air to circulate. 
	• Keep the storage areas clean and dry. 
	• Clean up spills immediately. 
	• Report any signs of pests to EHS Department as soon as they are noticed. 
	• Ensure any stock that has been recalled / damaged/ passed its date/ spoilt is kept separate from the 	   other stock. Follow the chilled food waste procedures. 
	• All cleaning chemicals should be stored separately. Please make sure that the above rules are followed 	   at all times. Report all problems found immediately to EHS Department.
14. Durability Dates
	
14.1	Dates are used on packaging to indicate the period when the food is safe and is in the best condition. 	Date marks include ‘use by’ dates for highly perishable foods and ‘best before’ dates for less perishable 	items. 
14.2	Use by: This code is used on food that goes off quickly such as chilled products; these products are 	intended for consumption within a specified period of time. After this date the food may be unfit to eat. 
14.3	It is an offence to sell food after its use by date. All food must be removed from sale before their use by 	date expires. If a product is labelled as USE BY 14 JAN, then it must be sold and consumed before, or 	on the 14 Jan. 
14.4	Best Before: This type of coding is used on food that is non-perishable like cereals and canned 	products. The Best before dates relate to the quality of a product. Should a product exceed its best 	before day its quality may be compromised but it will remain safe to consume or use. This can apply to a 	range of products including dried, canned, or frozen goods. 
14.5	It’s not a food hygiene offence to sell food beyond its best before date, please refer to the 'too good to 	waste' policy for further guidance on what and how we sell products beyond their Best Before Date. The 	business has made the decision to not sell chilled best before products beyond their Best Before Date.
	
15. Cleaning
15.1	Our aim is to achieve the highest standards of cleanliness and food hygiene. 
15.2	This is particularly important to Holland & Barrett as we are health food retailer and sell many products 	that are free from preservatives and additives. Hence, our products may be more vulnerable to 	infestation, have shorter shelf lives and maybe more prone to mould or bacterial growth. 
15.3	Our aim is to reduce these risks to a minimum, by paying particular attention to cleanliness and food 	hygiene.
15.4	The aim of cleaning is to make the area free from dirt and contamination. Cleaning is intended to keep 	food and workplaces safe. In particular, cleaning aims to: 
• Protect food from contamination. 
• Reduce the opportunities for bacterial growth, by removing food debris. 
• Avoid attracting pests. 
• Maintain a safe environment, for example to stop someone from slipping on a greasy floor. 
• Create a good impression for customers. 
• Carry out our legal and moral obligations. 
15.5	Routine cleaning and good housekeeping are the most important factors in maintaining a satisfactory 	standard of hygiene. You must follow the cleaning schedule to ensure all areas of the store are kept 	clean. 
16. 	Cleaning Materials
	
16.1	Remember the following:
• Never mix chemicals. 
• Only use the chemicals as listed on the approved cleaning list in the Health and Safety Manual. 
• Store all cleaning chemicals and materials away from food. 
• Store all cleaning chemicals and materials in one place. 
• Keep the amount of cleaning chemicals to a minimum. 
• Keep all cleaning equipment such as cloths, mops, buckets and dusters clean. 
• Do not purchase any chemicals except for the ones on your ordering system.
16.2	You must check in your Health and Safety Manual for guidance on the correct chemicals to use for 	cleaning (COSHH Risk Assessment). 
16.3	Stores can order their cleaning consumables through Bates Office Suppliers. All cleaning consumables 	ordered are delivered directly to stores.
17. Personal Hygiene (cont.)
17.7	Washing Hands Correctly
	Simply rinsing the tips of fingertips under cold water does not count. 
	Here are some reminders: 
• Always use warm water. It's better to wet hands before applying soap as this prevents irritation. 
• Rub hands together vigorously for at least 20 seconds, making sure both sides of the hands are 	   washed thoroughly, around the thumbs, between each finger and around and under the nails. 
• Then, rinse with clean warm water. 
• Germs spread more easily if hands are wet, so dry them thoroughly. Use a clean dry towel, 	   paper towel or air dryer; it doesn't matter which. 
17.8	Checklist for Good Hygiene Practice:
• Wash and dry your hands thoroughly after going to the toilet. 
• Do not handle open food if you are suffering from diarrhoea and / or sickness. 
• Tell your manager if you have infected cuts or sores. 
• Use waterproof plasters for cuts and grazes. 
• Tell your manager if you or anyone in your household is ill with sickness or diarrhoea. 
• Tell your manager if you have returned from a holiday abroad with sickness and diarrhoea or suffered whilst you were away. 
• If you visit the doctor, tell him that you work in a food business. 
• If in doubt, please contact Technical Department or People Services for further specific advice.
18.	Smoking
18.1	Smoking is not allowed inside any of the stores. If any team members do smoke and use outside areas of 	the store for smoking, they should always dispose of their cigarette butts in a suitable container that is 	emptied regularly. 
18.2	E-cigarettes are also not allowed to be used inside any of our stores. These can only be smoked / vaped 	in designated areas. This applies to both, staff and customers. 
18.3	By Law, we are required to display a Non-Smoking sign in our store windows. Please ensure one is visible 	in your store window at all times.
	
19. Illness & Food Handlers
19.1	As a food business we have to take all steps to ensure that everyone at the store does not handle food if 	they are sick. 
19.2	Report to your manager if you are suffering, or are suspected to be suffering, from food poisoning or a 	food borne illness. Symptoms that may indicate food poisoning or a food borne illness are: 
	• Diarrhoea 
	• Vomiting 
	• Fever 
	• Stomach cramps and pain
19.3	As a food business we have to take all steps to ensure that everyone at the store does not handle food if 	they are sick. 
19.4	Report to your manager if you are suffering, or are suspected to be suffering, from food poisoning or a 	food borne illness. Symptoms that may indicate food poisoning or a food borne illness are: 
	• Diarrhoea 
	• Vomiting 
	• Fever 
	• Stomach cramps and pain
19.5	If you are off work for food poisoning, then you will be required to go to your doctors. 
19.6	If the doctor confirms you are ill with food poisoning, you will generally be required to be off work until 	you are 48 hours symptom-free. After this period, you will still need to be extra vigilant with your 	personal hygiene. 
19.7	If you suffer from more serious forms of food poisoning, you may well need to provide your doctor with 	stool samples and have two to three negative stool samples prior to returning to work. 
	
20. Pest Control
20.1	We sell a number of raw, unprocessed foods and therefore we have to be extra vigilant of infestation 	from stored product insects, mites and rodents. 
20.2	We have very strict controls with our suppliers and at our packing plant. We regularly audit suppliers and 	ensure that the products we sell are of the highest quality. We also operate a Pest Control Contract.
20.3	Infestations of moths, beetles and mites can originate in the products and lie dormant for several weeks 	before coming active. Hence it is extremely important that:
• All staff know how to look for signs of infestation 
• Correct stock rotation is followed. 
• Good hygiene standards are maintained at all times.
21. Rodents
21.1	Rats and mice can cause us big problems. However, each year we spend a great deal of money on 	preventative action. 
21.2	We operate a national pest control contract. 
	The current contract covers:
• Rats 
• Mice 
• Cockroaches 
• Garden Ants 
• Silver fish 
• Fly Breeding Sites 
• Stored Product Insects, i.e. Indian Meal Moth 
21.3	You may also be given advice on Pigeon Proofing. 
21.4	All store reports are stored electronically on the on-line system called Pest Alert. All stores, EHS 	Department, Regional Managers and Divisional Directors have access to this system to review any 	reports as required. 
21.5	Pest Technician will always complete a report following their visit. It is Store’s responsibility to de-brief 	Technician following each visit, read the electronic version of the report to ensure all detail is correct and 	sign the report. It is Store’s responsibility to complete all actions identified and requested by Technician.
21.6	The frequency of visits made by the contactor to your store will depend on the risk level your store has 	been given. We operate a targeted approach to pest control. 
 
	
21. Rodents (cont.)
21.7	Please be aware that we are required by Environmental Health to produce any pest contractor visit 	reports on request. Should a request be made by an Inspecting EHO please show them the reports 	directly on the Pest Alert Portal. If you require any assistance on the day, please call EHS Department 	directly on Tel No: 02476 215 500. 
21.8	Following a visit by the Technician you must:
• Read what has been written on the report they have left 
• Action points that the pest contractor have raised that you can solve as soon as possible 
• Telephone EHS Department immediately and report the works that are required that you cannot solve. 
• If the pest contractor reports any pest activity at your store this must be reported to EHS Department immediately. 
21.9	All contact with the pest contractor is made through EHS Department. Please do not contact the 	contractor directly. 
21.10	If you require the pest contractor to visit your store, please telephone EHS Department on Tel No: 	02476 215 500 and they will be able to take all the details and organise a Call Out for you. 
21.11	Evidence of a problem 
	The main signs of activity are: 
• Dead bodies 
• Droppings 
• Unusual smells 
• Gnawing marks 
• Torn or damaged packets or boxes 
• Hairs 
• Smears or runs If you want to learn more your Pest Control Technician will advise you. 
21.12	Preventing Problems 
	We can prevent the risk of a mouse or rat causing a problem at our store by: 
• Reporting any proofing issues to EHS Department. 
• Reporting any issues raised by the pest control contractor to EHS Department. 
• Keeping your store clean and tidy. 
• Cleaning up any spillages. 
• Cleaning behind your kick plates on the shop floor regularly, as dust and debris can be used by rodents to build nests. 
• Emptying bins daily, don’t forget the staff room bins. 
• Ensuring all staff know the signs of rodent activity. 
• Storing all food off the floor. • Keeping back area tidy outside the store. 
21.13	Please see the full Pest Prevention and Control Policy for further details or contact the EHS 	Department at the Store Support Centre on 02476 215 500 for further help and advice. 
	
22. Store Infestation Checks
22.1	Before products are put out for sale they should be visually checked. All checks should be recorded in 	your 'Daily Pest Control Checks' in Applied Principles. 
22.2	At least one full section per day should be checked and recorded in Applied Principles. If you find a 	problem, you should notify the EHS Department immediately and seek advice, but if a food product is 	affected also:
• Remove the affected and suspect stock from sale. 
• Clean shelves and check surrounding stock for infestation. 
• Seal well in double bags. 
22.3	If an infestation at your store is found, e.g., insects or moths are found flying or crawling, a call out to our 	pest control contractors will be made via EHS Department. 
22.4	If there is a problem at your store, seek advice from EHS Department.
22.5	Infestation checks should be done daily. This is flexible and can be done as you are filling and rotating 	stock. Nuts, cereals and flours are very susceptible to infestation and need to be checked regularly. 	These checks should be recorded in your daily Pest check on applied principles, even if no infestation has 	been found.
22.6	 Daily cleaning of the areas indicated should be signed off once they have been completed. Don’t forget 	to clean the storeroom and Colleague areas. 
22.7	All stores must report any pest control issues to EHS Department as soon as they have been identified.
22.8	Store Managers must report any pest control issues to EHS Department even if the pest control 	company highlights these issues. EHS Department need to be informed if you find evidence of rats, 	mice, ants or moths in your store. 
22.9	During weekends and out of hours, major pest control activity issues i.e. a mouse sighted on the shop 	floor, a dead mouse found on the shop floor or in the stockroom etc. must be reported to the Regional 	Manager (RM) who will then follow Emergency Out of Hours procedure. 
	
24. Store Manager & RM accountabilities
24.1	Store Manager is accountable for: 
> Understanding own store risk level.
> Advising EHS Department if Routine Visits, as determined by the risk category, have not been completed by the pest contractor. 
> Be aware of any Call out raised by the store.
> Advising EHS Department if a Call out has not been attended with 24hrs of being raised.
> Understanding content of each report submitted by the pest contractor post store visit. 
> Ensuring that all store actions have been completed and confirmed as completed on Pest Alert. 
> Ensuring that any cleaning actions relating to current infestation are completed and confirmed on Pest Alert as completed on the day of the store visit.
> Ensuring effective store communication is in place so accurate information can be given to 	 Technician during the visit and any findings and actions discussed within the RM. 
> Ensuring all Operational trained Level 2 Colleagues understand and can use Pest Alert System. 
> Raising any issues with your pest contractor visits directly to EHS Department on 
	     tel: 02476 215 500.
24.2	Ops Level 2 trained colleagues are accountable for: 
> Understanding and knowing how to use Pest Alert System. 
> In the absence of the store manager be aware of any call out raised by the store. 
> In the absence of the store manager advising EHS Department if a Call out has not been attended with 24hrs of being raised. 
> In the absence of the store manager understanding content of each report submitted by the pest contractor post store visit. 
> In the absence of the store manager ensuring that all store actions have been completed and confirmed as completed on Pest Alert. 
> In the absence of the store manager ensuring that any cleaning actions relating to current infestation are completed and confirmed on Pest Alert as completed on the day of the store visit. 
> In the absence of the store manager ensuring effective store communication in place so accurate information can be given to Technician during the visit and any findings and actions discussed within the store team. 
> Supporting the Store Manager with delivery of actions identified by the Technician during their store visits. 
	
25. Best Practise For Effective Pest Store Visits
25.1	The frequency of your pest contractor visits will depend on two things:
• If you have activity 
• Your risk rating If you have activity pest contractor will be attending a minimum of twice a week. 
25.2	When the pest contractor attends, please follow the steps below: 
> Get the Technician to sign in (follow the Signing in Policy). If you are not getting visitors to sign in this is a breach of security and company procedure. 
> Provide feedback to the Technician, in relation to any found stock damage, where the stock damage was found and any sightings. 
> Spend as much time as possible with the Technician. 
> Ask the Technician questions if you are unsure of what has been done during the visit. 
> The Report will be available on Pest Alert as soon as it is posted by the Technician. 
> Ensure that you get detailed feedback from the Technician before signing the handheld device on which the report is produced. 
25.3	Please note that once the report is signed the person signing the report will be accountable for any store 	recommendations made such as housekeeping issues, etc. 
25.4	We need to ensure that all stores and the EHS Department Team are working in partnership, but stores 	need to play their part and ensure that they are reporting all stock damage, sightings and any other 	concerns you may have in relation to the infestation in your store. We expect the following from any 	store with activity.
> Infestation checks to be completed pre-opening on applied principles. 
> All cleaning in the affected areas must be completed pre-opening. 
> Any damaged stock or droppings must be removed prior to the store opening. 
> Report new stock damage/dropping in new areas and sightings directly to EHS Department immediately on 02476 215 500. 
> Report no attendance from pest contractor immediately on the above number. 
> Feedback any concerns in relation to the Service provided by the Technician to EHS Department Team as soon as possible after the Technician’s visit. Concerns can be raised either directly on 
     02476 215 500 or via your Regional Manager. 
25.5	Any visit from the local Environmental Health Officer could potentially lead to the store being served an 	Improvement Notice or a Prohibition Notice, store closure and prosecution if the above checks are not 	being completed in rodent active stores. 
25.6	If you require any further help or advice, then please contact EHS Department on 02476 215 500.
	
26. What Is Expected When Cleaning
26.1	Shelving and overhead cupboards Shop Floor and stock room 
> Remove stock from the shelves.
> Spray anti-bacterial surface cleaner on the shelves.
> Wipe surface with a suitable cloth.
	*Please note that the above can be carried out in conjunction with you daily date code and infestation 	checks
26.2	Underneath the kick plates and base shelves – shop floor and stock room 
> Remove kick plates or if you have fixed kick plates then the stock on the base shelves will require removing in order to remove the base shelves (this refers to the shop floor only).
> Hoover/sweep to remove any dust debris. 
	*Base shelves in the stock room should be six inches from the floor is sufficient space to allow a hoover 	nozzle or a sweeping brush. 
26.3	Chiller Freezer units Inside the units 
> Remove any stock items.
> Spray the surface with anti-bacterial cleaner to the surface.
> Wipe with a suitable cloth.
26.4	Door seals 
> Spray anti-bacterial cleaner onto the seal (this must include the top and bottom).
> Wipe down with a suitable cloth this must include in between the groves of the seals. 
26.5	Vents 
> Hoover/sweep the front of the grill to remove any build-up of dust. 
> Spray anti-bacterial cleaner on the grill and wipe clean with a suitable cloth. 
26.6	Toilets 
> Sweep/hoover the floor ensuring all corners are swept. 
>  Mop the floor using a suitable mop and floor cleaner. 
> Spray anti-bacterial cleaner onto the sink, splash back tile surfaces and surface of the toilet and wipe away with a suitable cloth.
> Put toilet cleaner down the toilet and scrub with the toilet brush then flush to ensure that any residue has been removed. 
	
26. What Is Expected When Cleaning (cont.)
26.7	Staff Room 
> Any cutlery/ dishware used should be washed using the washing up liquid and hot water – this should be done as and when they are used. 
> Spray anti-bacterial cleaner to all surfaces and wipe down with a suitable cloth. 
> Remove all items from the cupboard under the sink
> Spray anti-bacterial surface cleaner and wipe with a suitable cloth. 
	*The above needs to be carried out in-line with your 13-week cleaning scheduled and ensure that the 	cleaning scheduled is completed within the daily diary.
27. Enforcement Bodies
27.1	Environmental Health Officers and Trading Standards Officers may visit your store from time to time. 	They may visit to:
• Carry out an inspection to make sure your store complies with the current legislation. 
• Take samples from your store for analysis. 
• Investigate complaints. 
27.2	When a visit is made:
> Be as helpful as possible. 
> Ask for identification. 
> Ensure the officer signs in and leave their name, telephone number and comments on your visitor signing in sheet clearly. 
> Following a visit, call EHS Department and your RM. 
> If a report is left with you or samples, these must be forwarded to EHS Department immediately. 
27.3	What to do if an Environmental Health Officer inspections your store.
	
	An Environmental Health Officer can inspect your store at any time. This can be to carry out a routine 	inspection or following a complaint. If your store is visited follow the below: 
> Request that they sign in and leave contact details. 
> Escort them around the store and assist with their requests providing any relevant documentation. 
> Request a copy of the inspection report if you are not automatically given one. 
> Report the inspection to EHS Department on 02476 215 500 giving a brief overview of the inspection and any actions requested. 
> Inform your RM of the inspection. 
	
27. Enforcement Bodies (cont.)
27.4	Typically, the EHO may want to look at: 
• Housekeeping standards 
• Your Applied Principles records (obtain from EHS Department) 
• Temperature submission on applied Principles (obtain from EHS department) 
• Request information about any pest control issues within the store 
• Request Pest Control report – please show any reports requested directly from the Pest Alert Portal 
• Asbestos Surveys 
• Stock rotation – they will carry out checks for an out-of-date stock 
• Storage of stock items on the floor
27.5	Environmental Health Officers 
	An EHO may visit your store to ensure compliance with food safety laws and hygiene. They may visit 	your store at any point when you are open. They may ask to see this manual or any records such as your 	Applied Principles checks, temperature records and cleaning schedule during the visit.
27.6	Trading Standards 
	Trading Standards Officers are more concerned with composition of food, labelling and correct pricing 	of products. They may take samples from your store. 
27.7	Sampling Visits 
	The samples that are taken by Trading Standards Officers or Environmental Health Officers are to 	ensure the products comply with the law. 
	This is the normal procedure, and the following steps are to guide you through what to do when Trading 	Standards or Environmental Health Officers visit your store:
> Ensure all visitors’ sign in using the visitor signing in sheet. All sections must be completed clearly. Please check you can read the details given. 
> Accompany the visitor around your store. 
> Answer any questions and provide SSC details to the visitor and ask for them to contact us directly with a report of what has been taken and for what purpose. If you are unsure of any response to give, please contact EHS Department. 
> Usually, three samples of a product are taken, and one will be left at the store. If they do not leave a sample in the store, please collect a sample of the same product with the same batch code and expiry date. 
> Under Food Safety Legislation, Environmental Health Officer (EHO) and Trading Standards Officers (TSO) have the legal authority to take samples of products. We cannot request payment for samples although many authorities may choice to pay for them. 
> You must report all enforcement visits on Eco-online within 24hrs and inform your RM that you have had a visit. 
	
27. Enforcement Bodies (cont.)
> All ambient product samples must be retained securely in the stock room, placed in a box or tote clearly labelled 'product samples not for sale', along with any reports that may have been left by the EHO / TSO. The store will be informed by Product Compliance or EHS when these products can either be returned to sale (If still in date), sent back to Burton, or disposed of. If we receive notification that the sample(s) have failed, we will ask you to send the product to the Product Compliance team via Burton in your green bag. Please ensure that the product is securely wrapped or boxed and clearly addressed to product compliance. The product sample must have your store name and number attached to ensure that we know what store the product has come from. 
> Chilled product samples - We do not have the facilities in store to hold chilled product samples while testing is completed. If an EHO or TSO take a chilled sample, please ensure you complete the visit on Eco-online within 24hrs. There is no requirement for you to keep a 3rd chilled sample in store or send it to Burton. 
> Once the results of the sampling are available, the EHO or TSO will report back to the EHS Department and Product Compliance where appropriate. Any relevant information will be returned to store along with instructions for any samples held. You may be requested to return the product to sale (if still in date), sent it to Burton or to dispose of it. 
27.9	If you have any queries about visitors or sampling at your store, please contact the EHS Department or 	Product Compliance for further advice. 
27.10	ALL VISITS, INCLUDING FIRE OFFICER, EHO OFFICER, TRADING STANDARDS OFFICER, LANDLORD, CENTRE MANAGEMENT, etc. MUST BE REPORTED TO THE EHS DEPARTMENT ON ECO-ONLINE WITHIN 24HRS.
28. Contractors
28.1	Contractors will need to visit your store from time to time. Contractors may be sent by: 
• EHS Department i.e., Pest Control Contractor. 
• Facilities Services i.e., to repair a broken-down chiller or freezer or Fire Alarm/appliances Services. 
• Property Department i.e., if your shop is being refit, or repairs are needed. 
28.2	All contractors must show you their identification and sign in using the Store Daily Diary. 
28.3	If at any point you are unsure whether you should allow the contractors into your store telephone 	Facilities and speak to the relevant department to ensure the contractors are authorised to enter your 	store.
	
29. Customer Queries & Complaints
29.1	If you have a food safety or quality problem with a product that a customer has highlighted and the 	customer requires a letter or contact from Holland and Barrett, then please contact Customer Services.
30. Product Withdrawals
30.1	All product recalls will be communicated to Stores on the Hub. Product recalls need to be done as soon 	as stores receive a recall task. Keeping stock on shelves that has been recalled could be breaking the law, 	so it’s important to act quickly on product recalls. 
30.2	A product withdrawal or recall can be initiated for many different reasons, but it’s usually due to food 	safety concerns, labelling problems or quality issues with a product. 
30.3	When you receive a product recall, here are a few steps to guide you through the correct recall 	procedure:
> All stores will receive a memo via the Hub informing them a product withdrawal (recall) is needed.
> Team members should check all stock immediately on the shop floor and stockroom / back of house area against the instructions on the memo.
> As instructed in the memo, all affected stock should be removed from sale immediately.
> Follow the instructions on what should be done with the recalled product e.g. destroy on site or return to the depot. This information will be stated on the memo. You should ensure the stock is not held at the store.
> Products returned to the depot need to be packaged and labelled correctly, in order to prevent damage to the product and ensure that they reach the correct destination. They should be placed in sensible sized, weighted containers for manual handling. Putting the product in mail bags / shop counter bags is unacceptable.
> The product withdraw notice contains the form that needs to be attached to the outside of the box when returning products to the depot.
> All stores need to complete the task on the Hub, to show that you have completed the withdrawal (recall) and whether you have the product in stock or have ‘nil’ stock.
> All stock should be put into ‘Product Recall Out’ on the SIM, otherwise the order office will be unable to credit.
> If products are to be returned to the Depot, only put into ‘Product Recall out” once the product has been returned and not before.
> Ensure stock is returned to the depot and put into ‘Product recall out’ promptly, as there is a deadline for claims which will be stated on the withdrawal (recall) paperwork. After the deadline no return means no credit.
	If you have any queries about making a claim, please contact the Order Office
H&B Retail Email Account Policy
1. Statement
Email is essential to our business and your corporate email should be used for work purposes only. As a rule, we recommend that you use strong passwords and be vigilant in catching emails that carry malware or phishing attempts. If you are not sure whether an email you have received is safe or not, speak to our IT team immediately. 
It is important to be respectful to all colleagues and to always remain professional. The language used across all platforms is monitored and the use of inappropriate language or unsuitable etiquette will not be tolerated. Failure to follow the guidelines set out in this policy, may result in action being taken under the disciplinary procedure.
2. Store Email Account
2.1	Stores are provided with a generic Email account for the store. To log in a colleague will need the 	store number followed by @hollandandbarrett.com. For example, 1234@hollandandbarrett.com. 
2.2	The password is issued by Tech Support and if needed can be reset by calling 0330 055 7284. 
2.3	The store email is restricted.
2.4	All store colleagues have access to this email account. 
2.5	The store email account should be checked daily.
2.6	No sensitive information should be sent as the emails can be seen by all colleagues. 
2.7	Colleagues should not send any personal emails e.g., to family and friends 
2.8	For any issues regarding outlook call tech support 0330 055 7284.
 
3. Personal H&B Accounts
3.1	All colleagues will be provided with an email address for the purpose of logging in to various 	account. This email address is to be used to log into several applications including SIM, BIP, and 	HHT inventory applications. 
3.2	The email account will need to be set up for all new starters.
3.3	Colleague accounts should not be used to send correspondence from outlook and are in place 	solely for access to the applications stated above. 
3.4	Emails should be sent from the generic store email unless it contains sensitive data, in which case 	contact your line manager. 
4. Email Use on Personal Devices
4.1	All colleagues are prohibited from using Holland & Barrett Emails on personal devices, this includes 	accessing your personal H&B email, Teams accounts, or using the store email through a personal 	device. 
4.2	Access will be granted in some circumstances to enable email use on personal devices. Colleagues 	who may be granted access include Managers in Action (MIA) representatives, Trade feedback 	representatives and those where a request is made from a Regional Manager (RM) for a regional 	support need.
4.3	These accounts are only to be used in relation to the roles and additional duties outlined above. 
5. Use of Personal Devices
5.1	Limited non-business use may be permitted if usage doesn’t: 
> Interfere with your responsibilities or performance.
> Interfere with anyone else’s role, their responsibilities, or their performance. 
> Have undue impact on the operation of our systems. 
> Violate the provision of the relevant policy, Code of Conduct or any company policies, guidelines, or standards.
6. Use of Company Computers, Phones, and Internet    	Connections
6.1	As stated in the colleague handbook the use of company computers, internet connections and 	other company technology are monitored and restricted. 
6.2	We set clear guidelines for using computers, phones, internet connections, Wi-Fi and social media 	sites to ensure security and protect our assets, people and our customers.
6.3	Where use is permitted (for business purposes or limited non-business use) we reserve the right to 	monitor, access and review your usage in line with the Data Protection Policy. This is for legal, 	regulatory, and other legitimate business purposes, and includes monitoring your internet use, 	reviewing emails you send and receive, testing network systems, reviewing files stored on our 	systems and monitoring and recording calls.

7. Internet and Wi-Fi Usage
7.1	Our corporate internet connection is primarily for business use, but you can occasionally use our 	connection for personal purposes, such as browsing the web, if its usage doesn’t interfere with 	your duties. 
7.2	We expect you to stop personal activities that slow down our internet connection if you’re asked 	to. 
7.3	You should never download or upload inappropriate, illegal, or obscene material (including online 	gambling or betting sites) using company equipment and/or using corporate internet connection.
 
Petty Cash & Expenses Policy
1. Statement
Store colleagues may need to pay for business related expenses such as travel, Christmas functions, or general expenses, on an ad hoc basis, and in such instances may use the till pay-outs process. 
All expenses must be claimed in accordance with this policy. Please ensure you fully understand what can & cannot be claimed via expenses. If you are travelling for business or incurring expenses and are not entirely sure which expenses are reimbursable, contact your Manager to clarify beforehand. You’ll need to keep receipts for all reimbursable expenses. Claims without a receipt will be rejected. Any attempt to claim expenses fraudulently or in breach of this policy may result in disciplinary action in accordance with our Disciplinary Policy.
2. Petty Cash
2.1	Store colleagues may need to use petty cash to pay for general expenses for the store.
2.2	All purchases made through petty cash must be compliant with the list of what can be claimed. Any 	requirements outside of this must be approved by your RM via email prior to making a purchase.
2.3	Before any money is removed from the till an expense/petty cash claim must be completed, a 	receipt provided, and authorisation gained via the Hub. Once authorisation is obtained, cash may be 	taken from the till using the pay outs process. Claims cannot be submitted until the purchase has 	taken place. 
2.4	The store manager is accountable for their petty cash budget
2.5	Failure to follow this policy or related processes may be dealt with in accordance with the 	companies Disciplinary Policy.
3. Petty Cash - What You Can Claim
3.1	Key cutting – once you have received your security letter from facilities this can be taken 	along with the keys to be cut.
3.2	SSC incentives that have been authorised by SSC via a Hub task – when an incentive is 	communicated to you it will include full details.
3.3	Seasonal claims – this is for seasonal claims such as Christmas allowance. Full details for 	this will be communicated out prior to any claims being made.
3.4	Fresh dairy milk.
3.5	Postage – there may be circumstance where stores need to use postage. Where possible 	this should be 2nd class. Only high value items or confidential post may be sent by recorded 	delivery. Any documents that need to be sent back to SSC i.e., right to work, colleague sick 	notes etc should be done so by the store scanner.
4. Petty Cash - What You Cannot Claim
4.1	This list  includes examples and is not exhaustive. If you are unsure, then please speak to your RM.
4.2	Consumables – these are available through SIM/Bates.
4.3	Dairy free alternative milk and UHT milk can be ordered through Bates.
4.4	Tea, coffee or sugar – can now be ordered through Bates with free delivery.
4.5	Wage advances/Bonus payments – any pay queries must go through the payroll team via the 	Payroll Query Form on Hub.
4.6	Incentives that haven’t been confirmed by SSC via a Hub task.
4.7	Electrical items – keyboard & computer mouse are now on Bates.
4.8	Personal items, decorative items.
4.9	Fines incurred while working or traveling to a store e.g., parking fines and speeding tickets – these 	must be paid by the individual .
4.10	Lunch payments. No claims for lunch provided to colleagues at meetings or covering stores will be 	authorised.
4.11	Window cleaning (except ROI where there is currently no contractor) - If you do need additional 	cleaning then please contact the Facilities Helpdesk via HALO.
4.12	Travel Expenses or expenses of anyone who does not work in a store i.e., head office colleagues or 	your RM.
5. Travel Expenses
5.1 	Expense claims are used for when colleagues need to travel for business related requirements 	outside of their home store i.e., covering in another store. 
5.2	Authorisation must be gained in advance from your RM if there is a requirement for a colleague to 	travel and incur an expense. All expenses should be accounted for by using the correct reason 	code. 
5.3	Details of expense claims must be included when completing a claim via the Hub. Claims can only 	be made following the event where a cost was incurred, and a receipt must be produced as proof. 
5.4	Prior to any money being taken out of the till an expense claim must be completed, the receipt 	uploaded, and authorisation gained via the Hub. Claims cannot be submitted prior to an event. 
5.5	When making a claim for fuel expenses you must provide a fuel receipt which includes a VAT 	summary. Without this we are unable to claim tax back. This does not have to be a receipt for the 	same day of when the travel occurred. A fuel receipt within one month is reasonable. Claims 	without a receipt will be rejected.
6. Travel Expenses - What You Can Claim
6.1	This list  includes examples and is not exhaustive. If you are unsure, then please speak to your RM.
> Mileage for travel in own vehicle
> Car parking  
> Bus/Tram fare 
> Train/Tube fare
> Ferry cost
> Taxi cost 
7. Travel Expenses – What you Cannot Claim
7.1 	Travel costs which amount to the same or lower cost than attending work at your home store. You 	can only claim travel costs between your base store and your covering store (see example below 	for clarity).
7.2	Example below: 
> Your home store is Royston
> Distance from your house to Royston store is 10 miles
> You are asked to cover in Hemel Hempstead store 
> Hemel Hempstead store is 30 miles from your house 
> Distance to covering store minus distance to home store = claim distance
> Your claim would be for 20 miles (40 miles total including return journey)
7.3	Please note you cannot claim expenses for working in your home store on any day even if required 	to work on your day off. 
7.4	Parking or speeding fines incurred.
8. Mileage Claims
8.1 	Rate paid:
> UK (England, Wales, Scotland & Northern Ireland):  45p per mile. 
>  Republic of Ireland: 45c per kilometer. 
8.2	Applies to:
> Any engine size. 
> Using any of these fuel types: Petrol, Diesel, LPG (Liquid Petroleum Gas), Biofuels, Hybrid & Electric. 
> All store colleagues: Manager, Assistant Managers, Supervisors and Colleagues
8.3	These rates are applicable to annual business miles of up to 9,999. If you are expected to travel 	10,000 miles or greater per year, please speak to your Regional Manager. It is the responsibility of 	the individual to keep track of their miles/kms used for business purposes.
9. Manager Responsibilities
9.1	Ensure colleagues are aware of the expenses and petty cash policy and related procedures.
9.2	When required managers must seek cover locally to minimise cost and carbon footprint. Speak to 	your RM if suitable cover cannot be found or further support is required.
9.3	Managers must organise store consumables appropriately to avoid running out of supplies and 	incurring unnecessary costs. Authorisation for claims relating to consumables may not be given in 	cases where a store has failed to plan their bates order appropriately. See product list for 	assistance.
9.4	Where multiple items are required, these are to be ordered together. By reducing the frequency of 	ordering we can help to keep costs down and will help to reduce our carbon footprint.
9.5	It is the managers responsibility to be aware of and stay within the budgets allocated to the store. 	These budgets are individual to stores and can be found on your BTR or via your RM. For more 	information on how to read your BTR please click here. Speak to your RM if you have any questions 	related your BTR or budgets.
10. All Colleague Responsibilities
10.1	Stores must never purchase items through petty cash that could cause injury to a customer or 	colleague or damage to the building. Instances will be investigated as breach of Petty cash 	procedure & EHS policy/procedure.
10.2	Stores must not purchase goods elsewhere if those goods are available on bates. Delivery & 	account charges are included in the per-product fee. Ordering via bates reduces time spent 	shopping for goods and processing claims.  
10.3	Provide a receipt for all expense claims made.
10.4	Minimise expense claims by only traveling when necessary. Consider if there is a more economical 	way to travel e.g., car sharing or using public transport. This will also help reduce our carbon 	footprint. 
10.5	When traveling outside of your home store you are required to provide the below information when 	completing the claim: 
> Travel by bus/tram/train/ferry – cost of fare and location to cross charge
> Travel in own vehicle – number of miles/km travelled, and location to cross charge
> Parking – cost of parking and location to cross charge
> Travel by taxi (must be pre-approved by RM’s) – cost and location to cross charge 
10.6	For public transport claims, go to the relevant operator site to download receipts where payment is 	contactless.
10.7	Pay as you go, and top up receipts WILL NOT be accepted. Download the actual cost of the 	journey from the operator's website for the claim.
10.8	Screenshots for public travel will not be accepted unless it shows the actual journey, cost & date.
1. Statement
Terms and conditions apply to all price override reason codes. The use of all codes will be monitored to ensure they are within the guidelines stated. Suspected improper usage or overuse will be investigated in line with our Disciplinary Policy A price override can be used to manually adjust the price of an individual product for a specific reason. To ensure price override reason codes can be monitored and investigated efficiently.
All reductions are tracked and actioned through Destiny therefore, the use of the price override codes should be minimal. The use of these reason codes should be used in instances where the till will not scan the destiny QR code on the reduction label or where the reduction label is missing or damaged. Scanning any Destiny QR code through the till, will automatically adjust the price of the product.
2. Price Override Reason Codes
2.1	Price override code options are as follows:
• Incorrect Shelf Edge Label (SEL)
• Incorrect Price Scan
• Close to Expiry (Ambient)
• Close to Expiry (Chilled)
• Damaged but Saleable
• Outlet Stores
2.2	A comment must be entered within the available ‘Notes’ section when manually reducing an item 	e.g., “adjusted price to honor incorrect SEL and SEL has been replaced.”
3. Incorrect Shelf Edge Label (SEL) 
3.1	The Incorrect Shelf Edge Label reason code should be used when the Shelf Edge Label 	(SEL) 	displayed is incorrectly priced for the product. If the SEL price is less than what is displayed on the 	till, we must honor the lower price for the customer. 
3.2	It is the responsibility of all colleagues to ensure that daily price changes are printed and 	actioned daily to prevent the use of this reason code. Where an incorrect SEL is identified, it 	must be replaced as soon as possible with a correctly priced SEL.
4. Incorrect Price Scan
4.1	The Incorrect Price Scan reason code can be used in circumstances where the SEL is correct, but 	the product is not scanning through the till at the correct price. This will most commonly involve a 	promotional product.
4.2	If a product is identified as not scanning at the correct price or promotional offer, the lower 	price or better offer must be honoured.
4.3	Incorrect Price Scan can be used to correct the price of an online order return in instances 	where the customers return QR code will not scan on the till. To ensure the correct value is 	returned to the customer, stores must check the purchase price paid using the customer's 	order confirmation email.
?5. Close to Expiry Date (Ambient)
5.1	Close to Expiry Date (Ambient) can be used on products that are approaching the use by expiry 	date or best before date.
6. Close to Expiry Date (Chilled)
6.1	Close to Expiry Date (Chilled) can be used to price override chilled products that are 	approaching the use by expiry date or best before date.
7. Damaged But Saleable
7.1	The damaged but saleable reason code is for use on any product in store that has been 	damaged 	either via your delivery or accidently in store, but the product can still be used or consumed safely 	and therefore sold at a reduced rate.
7.2	If a consumable product (such as food or supplements) has packaging that is opened or damaged, 	and the integrity of the contents are compromised, they are no longer considered saleable. These 	instead must be written off as destroyed.
7.3	The typical percentage reduction for anything damaged but saleable is 50%.
8. Outlet Stores
8.1	This reason code is specifically for the use of our Outlet Stores. This reason code enables our Outlet 	Stores to price match our non-outlet stores if the current promotion is superior to the Outlet offer. 
1. Statement
Our brand and image are important to us, and while you are working for us, we want you to  represent H&B to our Customers and the public with pride as your appearance contributes to our reputation and the success of the business.  Part of this is our teams being dressed in the correct uniform. How you wear our uniform is important because while you are wearing it you are representing the company and the brand. To support this, please ensure you adhere to the below policy.
2. Principles
2.1	Tops, aprons, tunics and badges will be supplied to all colleagues. 
2.2	Colleagues are expected to provide their own trousers or skirts and suitable footwear. 
2.3	It is not appropriate to wear leggings, jeans, combat trousers, inappropriate shirts, blouses, or tops. 
2.4	Suitable footwear should also be worn, this includes closed in, low heeled shoes. High heels should not be
	worn in stores. Further detail on footwear can be found within this policy or by clicking here.  
2.5	We also ask that the use of makeup, perfumes, and fragrance sprays are not excessive whilst on company 	premises. 
2.6	Wearing appropriate religious and cultural dress (including clerical collars, head scarves, skullcaps, 	turbans and religious piercings) is allowed provided it doesn’t create a health and safety risk to you or 	anyone else.
2.7	Store Managers and Assistant Managers have the choice to wear the colleague uniform, beauty 	specialist tunics or business dress, depending on what types of task they are carrying out each day.
2.8	Failure to adhere to the principles laid out in this policy may result in disciplinary action.
2.9	While we appreciate and respect the diverse nature of all our colleagues and their views, no political or 	national flags should be displayed on uniforms, with the exception of name badges where the national flag 	denotes your spoken language(s).
3. Supplied clothing
3.1	Tops, aprons and badges will be provided to all colleagues based on their working hours or their 	specialist  role as shown in the table in 3.7 and should be worn at all times.
3.2 	In addition to the base allocation, all colleagues can order 1 tunic. 
3.3	A fleece can be ordered for colleague use as an additional warm layer. 
3.4	It is your responsibility to launder your own uniform. 
3.5	For any new or additional uniform orders head to the ‘LINKS’ section on the Hub or click here. 
3. Supplied clothing cont.
3.6	If a colleague requires additional uniform for medical reasons, or to support with a physical  symptom that 	consistently impacts them at work (e.g., menopause), please contact the Regional  Manager for your 	region. Where required additional uniform can be arranged via your regions superuser account with RM 	approval.
3.7	When ordering any uniform, ensure the garment type is appropriate for the colleague's role in store, as 	shown in the table below.
3.8	When wearing a fleece please ensure that your colleague badge is visible and positioned to the right-	hand 	side of the chest.  General colleague uniform must be always worn even when wearing a fleece.
3.9	Aprons can be worn around the neck or folded and tied at the waist. If you choose to wear yours at the 	waist, please ensure that the Holland & Barrett logo is not obstructed.
4. Additional Uniform
			
4.1	In addition to the supplied uniform, 	colleagues are to provide the following 	clothing.
4.2	Appropriate smart, plain, dark-coloured 	trousers or skirt.
4.3	Appropriate smart, plain, dark-coloured footwear such as closed toe shoes or trainers with no visible 	logos 	or detailing. 
4.4	All colleagues, including Managers can wear dark trainers providing they fit the criteria stated. All 	footwear must also comply with the following safety requirements:
	4.4a	Footwear must fully cover toes
	4.4b	Flat sole or small heel
	4.4c	Footwear must be properly fitted and be comfortable.
	4.4d	If footwear is worn / damaged – tread worn on sole or sole damaged or detached, 			they must not be worn for work
	4.4e	Sole must be nonslip
	4.4f	Where fitted, laces must be tied 
	4.4g	Footwear must be appropriate for the tasks undertaken in both our shop floors and rear 			areas including staircases.
	4.4h	Footwear should offer feet protection for everyday knocks or items falling onto feet. 
5. Name Badges
5.1	Badges provide a personal touch and allow our customers to learn a little about you quickly. Our 	colleague badges will detail the following:
	5.1a	Name
	5.1b	Position in store
	5.1c	Length of service
	5.1d	Qualification status
	5.1e	Languages spoken including sign language (optional)
	5.1f	Your pronouns (optional)
	5.1g	Hard of hearing (optional)
5.2	Badges are to be worn at all times on the right-hand side of the chest where they will not obstruct our	logo and can be clearly seen. If wearing a fleece or apron, please ensure the badge remains visible and on 	the right-hand side of the chest. 
5.3	If a colleague's badge is lost or damaged, a replacement must be ordered using the Murry Badge Portal. 
6. New Starters
6.1	New Starter uniform can be ordered via the Murray Uniform Portal. New Starters should appear on 	your 	portal once they have been added to MyHR. Delivery may take 5 days for badges and 2 days for      	uniform to arrive in store.
6.2	It can occasionally take up to 7 days for a new starter to appear on our supplier ordering system (Murray 	Uniforms) where all future orders must be placed. If the colleague is required to work prior to the arrival 	of their uniform instruct them to wear a plain black short or long-sleeved t-shirt. 
6.3	A personalised badge must be ordered for all new colleagues as soon as possible. You do not need to 	wait 	for a new starter to appear on our supplier ordering system (Murray Badge Portal). We 	recommended 	ordering a badge on or before the new starters first shift.  Badges will arrive in 5 - 7 days after ordering.
6.4	All new starters should wear the generic ‘New Trainee’ Badge while awaiting the arrival of their 	personalised H&B badge. 
6.5	Please retain this badge instore to be used by all new starters.                                                                                 	Should the badge need replacing it can be ordered via Hub ordering.
6.6	When the colleagues personalised badge arrives, it should replace the                                                              	lime green trainee badge. Please use the 'I’m Learning' sticker to cover the                                                 	'Qualified to advise' logo. This sticker can then be removed once the new                                                       	colleague has completed their QTA+ training.

7. The Halo Code
Holland & Barrett are proud to have signed up to the Halo Code in December 2023. This pledge highlights our commitment to our black colleagues who wear their hair in their natural state such as afro’s, locs, braids or weaves, wigs, wear hair wraps and reiterating they are welcome to come to work as themselves. We support the movement to break the often-societal stereotype of these styles being perceived as ‘unprofessional’.
What this pledge means:
> 	Our organisation will display a copy of the Halo Code publicly and proudly in 	our building and/or on our website.
> 	Our organisation will announce our adoption of the Halo Code to staff, in 	person or by email.
> 	Our organisation name will be displayed on the Halo Collective website so 	that others can see we’ve adopted the Halo Code.
> 	Our organisation will embed the Halo Code within any existing dress code 	policy and include it in future staff handbooks.
> 	Our workplace will signpost staff to the additional resources on the Halo 	Collective website.
> 	If disputes around hairstyles arise, our organisation will refer to the Halo 	Code 	for guidance.
> 7.1	This pledge should be used in alignment with wider unform and health and safety guidance.
> 7.2	An example, but not limited to: Hair should be tied up for health and safety reasons, particularly in our 	distribution centre and retail stores. 
> 7.3	More information on the halo code can be found at: halocollective.co.uk


Retention & Confidential Waste Policy
1. Statement
GDPR practices must be followed when handling confidential data and waste at H&B. Not following GDPR practices leads to major consequences for any mishandling of confidential data, and it can also put our customers and company at risk.
2. Principles
2.1	Confidential waste is anything which contains any personal details of customers, colleagues 	&  anyone else. Including any commercially sensitive information such as sales figures and 	announcements which have not yet been made public.
2.2	All confidential details should only be kept for as long as you reasonably need to refer to them and 	stored as detailed in this policy.
2.3 	Following the retention period, any confidential waste should be shredded. Where this is not 	possible i.e., there is too much to shred, or the shredder is broken please put into a sealed tote 	clearly marked 'confidential waste' and send back to Burton to be destroyed on your next 	delivery.
2.4	Any colleagues found to be in breach of this policy, may be liable for prosecution and dismissal in 	lines with our disciplinary policy.
2.5 	Different documents need to be retained for varying amounts of time. Please see the full list 	provided for more details. 
2.6 	Any other paperwork that you may have i.e., maintenance call out invoices should be forwarded on 	to the relevant department before destroying. 
3. Filing systems
3.1	By organising paperwork and documents well, it will make the day-to-day management of your 	processes and team more efficient, and result in less misplaced items as everything will have its 	own place to be returned to. 
3.2	It will also support with visits to your store from departments such as EHS as they will know where 	to find the documents they require.
3.3	You may already have folders in your store that can be re-used. If not, folders and dividers can be 	ordered via bates using product codes: DV1416 and KF01332.
3. Filing systems (Cont)
3.4	Spine labels, front covers and contents pages are available to easily identify each folder and its 	contents. should you need to replace any they can be found by following the below links:
• Connections & Welfare Folder
• Operational Folder 
4. Office Filing system
4.1	Having a specific folder for different functions will help keep the right information to hand in the 	right place for quick reference. 
4.2	The below list details all sections that should be a part of the ‘Operational Folder’ of the filing 	system in the office. There are contents pages for each, which will show you what needs to be kept 	and filed in that folder and the relevant retention period:
• CCTV Log
• Period Exceptions 
• Product Withdrawals
        Document
Retention Time
Contractor Signing in Form
12 Years
CCTV Log Sheet
12 Months
Sample Tracker
3 Years 
Special Diets infographic and
Additional Allergen Information 
Signed by all current colleagues
Duplicate bank deposit slips
6 Months
Collection/change delivery receipts
6 Months
Duplicate bank deposit slips should remain in the banking book and be stored in the safe. Staple the cash collection/change delivery receipt to the relevant duplicate deposit slip.
ADHOC documents you find useful (pay dates, BTR, Crib sheet, weekly wrap up etc)
No legal obligation to retain
Stocktake info, Adjustments, low/neg report, Shrink Report
Previous and Current Period
All evidence/supporting documentation relating to any investigation Inc. adjustment report, discount and price override report, refund report
Previous and Current Period
Printed and signed copies of the exception reports
Previous and Current Period
        Document
Retention Time
P1 incident process
Current Version
Team Talks, Bag Checks
Previous and Current Period
Who to contact sheet 
No legal obligation to retain
Regional contact sheet
No legal obligation to retain
Fire Emergency Plan
Current Version
Asbestos Survey Report
Most recent version. 
Once the paperwork has been renewed with the latest copy the previous copy can be destroyed. There is no need to retain any old paperwork. 
Fire Risk Assessment
Most recent version. 
Once the paperwork has been renewed with the latest copy the previous copy can be destroyed. There is no need to retain any old paperwork. 
5. Celebrations folder
5.1	The Celebrations folder is an optional folder for all colleagues to store any certificates or Epic 	postcards they wish to keep. This folder should be kept in a colleague area where it is accessible to 	all colleagues. 
6. Front of house filing
6.1	The below folders are also required and are kept front of house: 
• Connections & Welfare Folder
• Easi Training Folder
7. HR Paperwork Retention times
7.1	We wouldn’t expect any HR related paperwork to be kept in store, these should be scanned on to 	peopleservices@hollandandbarrett.com. Examples below:
• Investigation notes 
• Disciplinary notes 
• Right to work documents- completed on the People Portal and then shredded 
• Resignation letters 
• Probation review forms 
• Interview feedback - updated in eArcu and then shredded
• Interview notes scanned to recruitment and then shredded
• Return to work - completed on the People Portal under ‘New Query or Request’
• Late to work - completed on the People Portal under ‘New Query or Request’

Returns, Exchanges & Refunds Policy 
1. Intro
This policy is designed to ensure fair treatment of customers whilst enabling our colleagues to make good decisions to protect company profits and maintain customer satisfaction. When dealing with customers we want colleagues to make the right impression and ensure that customers are satisfied with the service provided in store. Failure to follow this policy may be dealt with in accordance with the Disciplinary Policy.
Any unused item, with its seals intact and in a re-sellable condition, can be returned within 30 days of purchase to any Holland & Barrett store for a full refund to the original payment method. This is provided the original receipt or alternative proof of purchase can be produced.
2. Accepted refund criteria
2.1	It is the customer's responsibility to ensure proof of purchase is provided, without this, you must not 	process any refund. 
2.2	For products being returned with no fault, proof of purchase must be within 30 days of the 	purchase for 	both retail and web purchases to be eligible for a refund, exchange or store credit 	note. The customer must also return the product to a Holland Barrett store to be eligible for a return.
2.2	90-day money back guarantee schemes are available for selected products only. Proof of purchase 	must be provided, and the customer must return the empty packaging of the product to qualify for a 	return. These products are eligible for return within 100 days of the initial purchase. 
2.3	If a customer is returning a product that is faulty or that has caused an adverse reaction they are 	entitled to a refund, exchange or credit note within a longer timeframe following the initial 	purchase.  Proof of purchase must be provided, and the item being returned must be within its expiry 	date, Best  Before/Best Before End (BBE) or period after opening (PAO) timescale. The item being 	returned does 	not have to have its seals intact. The customer must also return the product to a 	store to be eligible for a return. If the product is not one which has an expiry date, BBE date, or a 	POA timescale, then a refund/exchange should be given within 6 months of the date of purchase.
2.5	If the business has requested the return of products for recall or withdrawal from customer use, the 	customer is entitled to a refund, exchange or credit note within any timeframe. Where possible, 	proof of purchase should be provided to ensure the return is generated at the correct value. Where 	proof of purchase is unavailable the value of the return should be generated at the price which is 	live in store on the day of the return. The item being returned does not have to have its seals intact.
2.6	If a customer is returning an online order in full because the goods are damaged, faulty or they 	have suffered an adverse reaction, the customer is entitled to a refund on their postage and 	packaging. If the customer is only returning part of their order, they would not be entitled to a 	refund on postage and packaging. The use of these codes will be monitored, any suspected abuse 	will be investigated and dealt with in accordance with the disciplinary policy. Click here to access 	the Postage & Packaging Refunds document.
3. Accepted proof of purchase types
3.1	A valid purchase receipt generated from our tills, or an order confirmation email for goods 	purchased online is the most preferred proof of purchase and should be used above any other 	proofs of purchase types where possible.
3.2	A bank statement can be used as proof of purchase; however, this is not an itemised receipt and 	will require additional investigation to issue the refund.
3.3	To use a bank statement as proof of purchase, the customer must be returning a product to the 	store they originally purchased the product from. This is so Bumblebee Reporting can be used to 	determine the value of the return.
3.4	If the customer has no receipt and wishes to use a bank statement as proof of purchase, the value 	on the bank statement must match the exact value of the product being returned. If it does not 	match the exact value, refer to point 3.5.
3.5 	If the bank statement does not match the exact value of the product being returned; a refund can 	only be issued by actioning the following:
> A transaction must be found on Bumblebee Reporting that matches the value and date shown on the bank statement.
> The  specific product being returned must be present on the transaction found on Bumblebee Reporting.
> The value of the refund must match the value shown for the product on the Bumblebee report, not the current live price.
4. What Cannot be Returned
4.1	Due to hygiene or safety reasons, we are unable to refund or exchange the following items, unless 	the item was found to be faulty or has caused an adverse reaction:
> Adult toys where the packaging/box has been opened and the security seal removed.
> Feminine hygiene/ sanitary products including underwear.
> Electrical appliances where the security seal has been removed.
> Medical devices (e.g., H&B&Me at home blood testing kits) if security seals have been broken.
> If a security seal has been broken, a refund can be processed minus a £/€10 admin fee.
> Medicinal Healthcare (even if sealed).
4.2	You should always refund the purchase price of the product, e.g., buy one get one half price or 	other promotions. When a promotional discount is triggered, the discount is applied across all 	applicable items. 
4.3	Products purchased on a promotion should be refunded at the promotion offer price. Where a 	receipt is available the till will automatically generate the correct cost for all returns.
4.4	If the customer does not have a receipt or is unable to provide alternative proof of purchase, we 	cannot offer a refund, exchange or store credit note.
4.5	Products that have been returned or exchanged previously cannot be refunded or exchanged again 	unless the goods are faulty or have caused an adverse reaction.

Rewards for Life Policy
1. Statement
H&B offer a loyalty programme that provides discounts and offers for both our colleagues and customers.
2. Principles
2.1	At the till, if the customer wishes to join the RFL programme, a new account can be set up using the 	customer’s personal details. It is important to capture as much detail as the application requires to 	ensure we hold an accurate record for the customer. No single characters or punctuation names, all 	data must be in full with valid contact details. (This is monitored via the single character report).
2.2	A customer’s email address must be captured to sign them up to the RFL programme.
2.3	Marketing preferences must be fully explained to the customer and the customer must confirm their 	consent using the till screen.
2.4	Under no circumstances should a colleague accept or decline marketing preferences or Terms & 	Conditions on behalf of the customer.
2.5	Any misuse of the programme, for whatever reason, constitutes the falsification of data and will be 	dealt with through the company’s disciplinary procedures.
3. Money-Off Vouchers
3.1	Money-off vouchers are issued only if the RFL account is activated – these are via email or post 	depending on customer preferences identified at sign up. 
3.2	The email/ postal mailer contains their unique money-off voucher printed with their name and 	membership number as well as a scannable barcode to allow you to process it through the till. The 	voucher can be printed at home or presented in the email. It can also be redeemed for online 	purchases.
3.3	If a customer has agreed to receiving marketing communications, their money-off voucher will also 	include segmented product vouchers which can be used once for one product per voucher (T&Cs 	are printed on the back and are available online).
3.4	Money-off vouchers can only be used once.
3.5	Money-off vouchers are valid for 3 months (unless otherwise stated).
3.6	Money-off vouchers must be presented at time of transaction either online or in store. 
3.7	Money-off vouchers are non-transferable and cannot be redeemed by anyone other than the card 	holder.
3.8	Money-off vouchers must be redeemed in full. No change or alternative will be given.
3. Money-Off Vouchers (cont.)
3.9	Money-off vouchers have no cash value.
3.10	The transaction must be equal to or higher than the value of the money-off voucher.
3.10	Money-off vouchers are redeemable in any Holland & Barrett UK/Ireland store, online at 	www.hollandandbarrett.com / www.hollandandbarrett.ie, via the H&B app or via the Contact 	Centre, however, cannot be used with Subscribe & Save transactions.
3.11	Points will not be collected on the money-off voucher amount.
4. Product Specific Vouchers
4.1	Product specific voucher validity varies, please check the details of the voucher before redeeming.
4.2	The terms and conditions for these vouchers will be listed with each individual voucher and are 	shown in full online.
5. Consequences of Breaches
5.1	It is a breach of company policy to falsely use RFL details to increase your store’s RFL participation 	percentage or to create financial gain from the accumulation of RFL points. 
5.2	We monitor and review transactional data using IntelliQ, which highlights potential misuse of the 	RFL programme. 
5.3	Any instances of misuse and any action taken will be dealt with in accordance with our Disciplinary 	Policy, and disciplinary action may be imposed. This could be up to and including Summary 	Dismissal for Gross Misconduct. 
5.4	Failure to follow company policy on RFL will be deemed as Gross Misconduct putting the 	business at risk under GDPR for the incorrect use of personal data.
5.5	When setting up a new RFL customer, the details entered must be for a genuine customer who is 	present to provide the details. Additionally, someone that lives at the same address can use the RFL 	account to accumulate points. You must not create an RFL account without a customer present. 
5.6	If a customer does not have an RFL account and declines to set up a new account, no RFL details 	must be applied to the sale. You must not add the RFL details of another customer, this includes 	applying any RFL accounts held by you to the sale.
5.7	Whenever a sale is processed, the RFL points generated must be applied to the RFL account of the 	customer making the purchase or with the consent of the person making the purchase. 
5.8	Any RFL money–off coupons issued to customers must be redeemed by the account holder. 	Redeeming RFL money-off vouchers that have been falsely gained from other customer’s sales 	will be treated as Gross Misconduct.
Signing-In & Search Policy
1. Signing-In
1.1	Anyone who is not a permanent colleague, i.e. not contracted to a store, must complete the visitor 	log.
1.2	This is in place to aid security and health and safety; it allows you to track who and when someone 	was in the store.
1.3	This log is useful in times of unexplained theft or in the event of a store evacuation to check 	everyone is accounted for.  
1.4	Any office-based Colleague or any visitor will be required to show ID and sign in before they will be 	allowed access to the premises.
1.5	Others who need to sign in may include; 
> Regional/Divisional managers
> Product Representatives i.e., Grenade
> Interview candidates
1.6	All contractors are required to show ID and sign in using a separate form. The Contractor Signing in 	form  is located on the Hub and must be printed and stored in your Welfare & Connections folder. 
1.7	If visited by Environmental Health, Trading Standards or a Fire Officer, ensure that they leave 	contact details, and you notify the EHS Department.
1.8	If you are ever unsure about an individual’s ID or someone's right to access the store - you must 	refuse them access to the premises and call the Retail Support Help Desk for further guidance.
2. Stop & Search
2.1	To protect both The Company and you, we have the right to carry out random searches of your 	belongings, bags, pockets, coats, vehicles and lockers as well as non-invasive personal searches. 
2.2	If you are searched, you will be offered the opportunity to be accompanied and will be invited to 	remove items yourself from your person or property. 
2.3	You can refuse to be searched; however, any refusal may be considered a breach of the Stop and 	Search Policy and disciplinary action may be taken against you in accordance with the Disciplinary 	Policy.
2.4	Bag checks
	Colleagues are to be searched at random at least once a week. All visitors and contractors must be 	searched before leaving the store. 
2.5	The person completing the check must not touch the colleague’s belongings, but request that they 	are shown the contents of bags and coats. 
2.6	Any items found that are stocked in-store must be accounted for with a valid receipt or proof of 	purchase.
2.7	The person completing the check must confirm the bag check has been completed upon the 	visitor’s sign out. 
Smoking Policy
1. Statement
As a company that promotes Health and Wellbeing for all, we operate a strict no smoking policy which complies with non-smoking legislation. This includes e-cigarettes and vapes.
2. Principles
2.1 	Smoking is not permitted onsite or within a reasonable distance of our premises except in 	designated areas. 
2.2	It is prohibited to smoke in fire exits and at the front of any retail store/premises, whilst wearing 	company uniform, as we want to create a welcoming environment for our customers, colleagues 	and visitors in line with the H&B brand.
2.3	Please ensure that your uniform and all company logos are not visible if you are smoking on 	your break. Please remove your apron if you are unable to cover our branded logo due to its 	positioning.
2.4	You can smoke during any scheduled unpaid breaks, but you are not permitted to take additional 	breaks to smoke cigarettes, e-cigarettes or vapes.  Any smoking paraphernalia should be in your 	locker, not on your person during your shift. 
2.5	Please dispose of any cigarettes responsibly and in the correct bins.
2.6	Smoking is not permitted in any vehicle or vehicles hired by The Company, including: 
> Company cars
> Hire cars
> HGV vehicles
> Pool cars
2.7	If you breach the regulatory guidelines, it will be dealt with in accordance with our Disciplinary 	Policy and may be treated as Gross Misconduct.
2.8	Please note it is also a criminal offence to smoke in smoke-free premises and this may result in a 	fixed penalty fine and/or prosecution.
2.9	This policy is in line with British Medical Association (BMA) guidance.

Store Incentives Policy
1. Statement
Incentives are chosen by the business for promotional purposes and to enhance customer and colleague engagement. Communication is provided via the Hub prior to an incentive launch. The communication will notify colleagues of the dates that the incentive will be active for and will provide any necessary instructions. Each incentive will provide its own terms and conditions. 
2. General Terms and Conditions
2.1	 You must be employed with the business at the time of the incentive.
2.2	All incentives will be reviewed following the end date to validate the qualifying transactions. All 	activity including, sales, refunds and discounts will be reviewed to ensure that all qualifying 	transactions have been processed with integrity. Any store or individual found to have been 	processing fraudulent transactions or acting unethically will be removed from the incentive and will 	face further investigation. 
2.3	All prizes will be awarded once a full review of the transactional data has taken place.
2.4	Incentives are non-contractual and can be removed at any time
Store Key Management Policy
1. Statement
The safety and security of all our colleagues and stores is of utmost priority and it is the responsibility of all store management to ensure the following policy is adhered to.
2. Principles
2.1	In order to be a key holder, a colleague must have completed operational training level 1 and be 	considered responsible by their manager. 
2.2	A key holder is trained to open and/or close a store and run the store in the absence of 	management. This may include their home store or another store if required. 
2.3	If lone working, the colleague must adhere to the guidance outlined in the Lone Working Policy.  
2.4	Under no circumstances are the store keys to be left unattended. They should be always kept 	on the key holder’s person whilst at work. 
2.5	Till keys and CCTV keys must be locked in the safe in a signed envelope and recorded in the Digital 	Key Log.
2.6	There should be nothing on the keys that identifies H&B as your place of work in-case the keys are 	misplaced.
3. Temporary Key Holders
3.1	If the store is being temporarily covered the key holder needs to ensure that the keys are passed 	directly to the covering key holder colleague and the Digital Key Log is updated. 
3.2	All keys must be passed hand-to-hand in person, and never left unattended instore or with a third 	party.
3.3	Ensure that all covering colleagues are recorded on MyHR. 
3.4	Ensure the store keys are secured in a safe location at home when you are not at work. 
4. Lost or Stolen Keys
4.1	Lost or stolen keys must be logged in the Digital Key Log immediately. Report the missing keys and 	the circumstances surrounding the situation to your RM and log on HALO for review.
4.2	You must report all stolen keys to your local police and obtain a crime reference number if 	appropriate.  
4.3	If a loss is deemed negligent after an investigation has been completed, the costs of replacing keys 	and locks may be recovered from the employee responsible. 
4.4	Failure to adhere to this policy may be investigated under our Disciplinary Policy. 
5. Safe Keys
5.1	If a non-key holder requires keys to access to the store an email should be sent to the RM and Loss 	Prevention Advisor, confirming the person's name, company, job role, time keys were given and the 	arranged return date of the keys.
	Examples of people who may need keys include:
> Contractors who need overnight access for work i.e. refits. Please note all out of hours work needs to be approved via your RM or the Nuneaton Hub.
> Contractors who need access to the back of house. 
> Nuneaton Hub colleagues who need to work from a store and require access to the manager’s office. They will always call ahead to approve this with the manager.
> With the exception of RM’s and DS’s, all visitors who may require access to locked/pin coded areas will approve this with store management in advance. 
> Visitors (not including customers) must be made aware of hazards, procedures and work practices in operation. These include the company’s safety procedures, such as alarm call systems, escape routes and assembly points, the smoking policy, visitor sign in policy and accident reporting procedures. 
6. What To Do If a Key Holder Leaves
6.1	When a key holding colleague leaves the company, the following actions need to happen on the 	day the key holder leaves the store (including temporary key holders who may be covering the 	store). It is the responsibility of  the store management and the RM to ensure these actions are 	completed. 
6.2	If the store has a burglar alarm fitted, then the alarm code will need to be changed. This should be 	done on the day the employee leaves. This can be done manually in most cases, however, if there is 	a problem, you will need to contact the Facilities Helpdesk via HALO.
6.3	If there are no suspicious circumstances surrounding the key holding colleague and all the store 	keys are accounted for, then no action needs to be taken with regards to changing the locks in the 	store and the Digital Key Log updated.
6.4	If there are suspicious circumstances, then as a minimum, the stores front door locks and rear locks 	(if there is access from outside) should be changed.
6.5	Suspicious circumstances include but are not limited to key holder leaving whilst under 	investigation without notice or a break-in is reported without forced entry. 
6.6	In all cases of dismissal for gross misconduct, both the alarm code should be deleted, and the door 	locks should be changed. If a safe key cannot be accounted for, then the safe lock should also be 	changed, and the keys logged as ‘lost’ in the Digital Key Log. 
7. Store Keys & Digital Key Log
7.1	To establish and uphold safety and security in store, the Digital Key Log stores records on the 	location of all 	keys in the business. 
7.2	All store keys and store key sets must be registered to the Digital Key Log.
7.3 	Keys must be with the colleague they are assigned to on the Digital Key Log.
7.4	Unassigned keys must be always be stored and logged in the safe. Any deviation from this may 	result in disciplinary action.
7.5	Ordering new keys must be signed off by an LPA. New keys MUST NOT be cut without 	authorisation. The cutting of keys without authorisation may result in disciplinary action.
7.6	New keys must be registered on the Digital Key Log, using the Digital Key Log Process at the 	earliest possible opportunity.
	
7.7	Key sets must be labelled, and the names of the key sets must be numerical (1, 2, 3, 4 etc). No 	other information must be written on the key tag for security reasons.
7.8	Changing keys outside of the store environment must be kept to a minimum. If it cannot be avoided, 	the Digital Key Log must be updated as soon as possible, and the backdated time captured in the 	notes section.
8. Store Closures & Refits (Under Review)
Supplier Sampling
1. Introduction
The purpose of this store guidance document is to provide a framework of minimum requirements for suppliers to safely conduct sampling on Holland and Barrett's premises or at corporate events. 
2. Pre-Sampling Visit
2.1	Stores will be notified 7 days prior to any supplier sampling activity by a colleague from head 	office.
2.2	Any issues or concerns, stores should contact the head office colleague that informed you of the 	visit and copy in central operations: operationssupport@hollandandbarrett.com
3. Food Safety, Hygiene & Allergen Requirements 
3.1 	Products containing peanuts (open products or fully wrapped / labelled) must not be sampled on 	site or at corporate events or activities.   
3.2	Refrigerated back up chiller space is only to be offered if there is space available. Available 	space in the chiller cannot be guaranteed on the day. Suppliers should provide their own 	facilities if needed e.g. cool bags, to help manage any product temperature storage requirements.
3.3	The sampling area must be supervised at all times by the supplier, or the products removed from 	the sampling area. Store colleagues will not be responsible for monitoring this area. 
3.4	No samples should be given to unaccompanied minors. Permission from accompanying parent or 	responsible adult should be obtained before samples are offered to minors. Store colleagues will 	not be responsible for monitoring this.
3.5	Vitamins, health products, minerals, supplement samples or any product age restricted by policy 	e.g. CBD or energy drinks, should not be offered to minors. Challenge 25 policy should be adhered 	to. Store colleagues will not be responsible for monitoring this.
3.6	Appropriate hygiene and handwashing standards must be maintained at all times by the supplier. 	Store colleagues will not be responsible for monitoring this.
3.7	Appropriate single use sampling consumables should be used (cups, trays, plates spoons, napkins 	etc) and supplied by the supplier. 
3.8	All waste or supplier stock should be removed from site by the supplier at the end of the activity.
3.9	The supplier should tidy up any area of the store they have operated sampling from.
4. Health & Safety, Fire, Logistics
4.1 	Sampling stands, equipment or marketing equipment the supplier brings on site should be easily 	portable, fit for purpose, safe, hygienic, stable, not create a hazard and be supervised at all times by 	the supplier. 
4.2	No plug in electrical equipment should be brought in or plugged into the store or have any form of 	trailing lead. Displays must not create a trip or slip hazard. Product heating equipment of any type is 	not to be used in stores.
4.3	Supplier stands or equipment should not restrict access from a fire safety, disabled access or 	customer circulation point of view in store. The location of any stands or activity in store is to be 	agreed with the store manager or supervisor on the day, before any sampling activities commence. 
 
4.4	Suppliers should bring with them any stock being used for the sampling activity, or have it delivered 	while they are on site. Store colleagues will not accept supplier deliveries or take responsibility for 	checking or storing the supplier stock or equipment in advance. 
4.5	Any accidents, incidents or complaints during or after the sampling activity should be reported to 	the store management team at the time, so it can be captured on the stores digital accident / 	incident reporting system. The supplier should also notify the head office colleague who booked the 	sampling event.
4.6	The supplier must comply at all times with the requirements, recommendations and regulations of 	the landlord or the insurers including but not limited to those relating to works, the property and 	access.
Too Good To Waste Policy
1. Statement
We endeavour to sell all our products before they approach their best before or use by dates. Unfortunately, that isn’t always possible, so to protect margin we have a best before reduction process that is designed to prevent as many products as possible from going to waste. 
2. Too Good To Waste 
2.1    Our ‘Too Good To Waste’ (TGTW) scheme allows certain products to be sold for 28 days after their best 	before date. See the Reduction Banding document for more details HERE. 
2.2   Products which are NOT included in Too Good to Waste will be reduced by 90% in the last day prior to 	expiry to support product sell through. 
2.3   Reductions should be completed daily using Destiny on the HHT. This allows reduction labels to be 	reprinted to display the correct reduced price within the required timeframe. This also identifies which 	products need to be removed from sale. 
2.4   Discounts will be monitored to ensure they are within policy and the markdown process is being followed.
3. Notifying The Customer 
3.1    All TGTW products must be displayed near a TGTW strut card as we have an obligation to notify the 	customer that the item is past its BBE date.
3.2    All short-dated products or expired products included in TGTW must display a reduced to clear (RTC) 	sticker. 
3.3    When displaying reduction labels, we must not cover the expiry date, batch number, directional 	instructions, ingredients, any allergy information or nutritional details or that product. For further 	information on sticker placement please refer to One H&B Way- Date Checking HERE
4. 	Which products cannot be sold past their BBE 	date?
4.1    Reasons why some categories cannot be sold past their BBE date:
• Products sold for specific health benefits where the benefits may be eroded if used after the BBE date.
• Certain ingredients in a product could begin to degrade deeming them unfit for consumption.
• The product is to be consumed over a long period of time after purchase and may not provide the same level of performance if consumed following BBE date.
• All products with a 'Use By' date are NOT to be sold past this date.
• If an approved item is not sold within 4 weeks of expiry adjust the stock file accordingly on SIMBA using ‘Past Expiry Out’ as the reason code.


	




